The Project Gutenberg eBook of Pausanias' description of Greece, Volume I.
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Pausanias' description of Greece, Volume I.

Author: active approximately 150-175 Pausanias

Translator: A. R. Shilleto


        
Release date: September 9, 2022 [eBook #68946]
                Most recently updated: October 19, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: George Bell and Sons, 1886

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/68946

Credits: Ian Crann, Turgut Dincer and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAUSANIAS' DESCRIPTION OF GREECE, VOLUME I. ***

                     _BOHN’S CLASSICAL LIBRARY._

                      PAUSANIAS’ DESCRIPTION OF
                               GREECE.




                              PAUSANIAS’
                         DESCRIPTION OF GREECE,

                        TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH

                          WITH NOTES AND INDEX


                   BY ARTHUR RICHARD SHILLETO, M.A.,

          _Sometime Scholar of Trinity College, Cambridge_.




                                VOLUME I.

        “Pausanias est un homme qui ne manque ni de bon sens ni de
    bonne foi, mais qui croit ou au moins voudrait croire à ses dieux.”
    --CHAMPAGNY.


                      LONDON: GEORGE BELL AND SONS,
                       YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
                                  1886.


          CHISWICK PRESS:--C. WHITTINGHAM AND CO., TOOKS COURT,
                            CHANCERY LANE.




PREFACE.


Of Pausanias personally we know very little, but that he lived during
the Reign of the Antonines, and travelled all round Greece, and wrote
his famous _Tour round Greece_, or _Description of Greece_, in 10
Books, describing what he had seen and heard. His chief merit is his
showing to us the state of the works of art still remaining in his day
in the Greek cities, which have since been swept away by the various
invasions that have devastated that once happy land. “When Pausanias
travelled through Greece, during the age of the Antonines, about 1690
years ago, he found every city teeming with life and refinement; every
Temple a Museum of Art; and every spot hallowed by some tradition which
contributed to its preservation. The ruthless destruction of these
works of art, in subsequent ages, has reduced them to a small number;
and the Traveller now pauses, with a melancholy interest, to reflect
upon the objects described by Pausanias, but which no longer exist.”[1]

  Pausanias’ _Description of Greece_ is also full of various
information on many topics. It is for example a mine of Mythology. For
its various matter it has been happily compared to a “County History.”
There is often a quiet vein of humour in Pausanias, who seems to have
been almost equally a believer in Providence and in Homer.

  I have translated from _Schubart’s_ Text in the _Teubner_ Series,
(1875), but have taken the liberty always, where the text seemed
hopeless, to adopt a reading that seemed preferable from any other
source. I have constantly had before me the valuable edition of
_Siebelis_, (Lipsiæ, 1827), to whom I am much indebted, especially for
his Illustrations, still veracity obliges me to state that occasionally
he too gives one reason to remember the famous lines of a well-known
Rector of Welwyn in the Eighteenth Century.

      “_The_ commentators each dark passage shun,
    And hold their farthing candle to the Sun.”

  In the _Index_ it is hardly necessary to state that I owe much to
_Schubart_.

  CAMBRIDGE,
    _May, 1886_.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] George Scharf, Esq., F.S.A. 1859. _Wordsworth’s Greece_, p. 1.




                               CONTENTS.


                                             PAGE

     BOOK I. ATTICA                             1

         II. CORINTH                           90

        III. LACONIA                          168

         IV. MESSENIA                         228

          V. ELIS                             302

         VI. ELIS. Part ii.                   360

             INDEX                            414




PAUSANIAS.




BOOK I.--ATTICA.




CHAPTER I.


On the mainland of Greece, facing the islands called the Cyclades and
the Ægean sea, the promontory of Sunium stands out on Attic soil:
and there is a harbour for any one coasting along the headland, and
a temple of Athene of Sunium on the summit of the height. And as one
sails on is Laurium, where the Athenians formerly had silver mines, and
a desert island of no great size called after Patroclus; for he had
built a wall in it and laid a palisade, when he sailed as admiral in
the Egyptian triremes, which Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, sent to punish
the Athenians, Antigonus, the son of Demetrius, in person making a raid
into their territory with a land force and ravaging it, and the fleet
simultaneously hemming them in by sea. Now the Piræus was a township
in ancient times, but was not a port until Themistocles ruled the
Athenians; but their port was Phalerum, (for here the sea is nearest to
Athens), and they say that it was from thence that Menestheus sailed
with the ships to Troy, and before him Theseus to exact vengeance
from Minos for the death of Androgeos. But when Themistocles was in
power, because the Piræus appeared to him to be more convenient as a
harbour, and it was certainly better to have three harbours than one
as at Phalerum, he made this the port. And even up to my time there
were stations for ships, and at the largest of the three harbours the
tomb of Themistocles; for they say that the Athenians repented of their
conduct to him, and that his relatives exhumed his remains and brought
them home from Magnesia. Certain it is that the sons of Themistocles
returned from exile, and hung up a painting of Themistocles in the
Parthenon. Now of all the things in the Piræus best worth seeing is the
temple of Athene and Zeus; both their statues are of gold, and Zeus has
a sceptre and Victory, while Athene is armed with a spear. Here, too,
is a painting by Arcesilaus of Leosthenes and his sons, that famous
hero who at the head of the Athenians and all the Greeks defeated the
Macedonians in battle in Bœotia, and again beyond Thermopylæ, and drove
them into Lamia over against Mount Œta and shut them up there. And it
is in the long portico, where those near the sea have their market,
(for there is another market for those more inland), and in the back
of the portico near the sea are statues of Zeus and Demos, the design
of Leochares. And near the sea is a temple erected to Aphrodite by
Conon, after his victory over the Lacedæmonian fleet off Cnidus in the
peninsula of Caria. For Aphrodite is the tutelary saint of the men of
Cnidus, and they have several temples of the goddess; the most ancient
celebrates her as Doritis, the next in date as Acræa, and latest of
all that which everybody else calls Athene of Cnidus, but the Cnidians
themselves call it Athene of the Fair Voyage.

  The Athenians have also another harbour at Munychia, and a temple
of Artemis of Munychia, and another at Phalerum, as has been stated
by me before, and near it a temple of Demeter. Here too is a temple
of Sciradian Athene, and of Zeus at a little distance, and altars of
gods called unknown, and of heroes, and of the children of Theseus and
Phalerus; for this Phalerus, the Athenians say, sailed with Jason to
Colchis. There is also an altar of Androgeos the son of Minos, though
it is only called altar of a hero, but those who take pains to know
more accurately than others their country’s antiquities are well aware
that it is the altar of Androgeos. And twenty stades[2] further is
the promontory Colias; when the fleet of the Persians was destroyed
the tide dashed the wrecks against it. There is here also a statue of
Aphrodite of Colias and the goddesses who are called Genetyllides.
I am of opinion that the Phocian goddesses in Ionia, that they call
by the name of Gennaides, are the same as these at Colias called
Genetyllides. And there is on the road to Athens from Phalerum a temple
of Hera without doors or roof; they say that Mardonius, the son of
Gobryas, burnt it. But the statue there now is (as they say) the work
of Alcamenes; this, indeed, the Persian cannot have touched.




CHAPTER II.


As one enters into the city there is a monument of Antiope the Amazon.
Pindar says that this Antiope was carried off by Pirithous and Theseus,
but the account by Hegias of Trœzen is as follows: that Hercules
besieging Themiscyra near the river Thermodon could not take it; but
that Antiope being enamoured of Theseus, (who was besieging the place
with Hercules), handed the place over to him. This is the account
Hegias has given. But the Athenians say that, when the Amazons came,
Antiope was shot by Molpadia with an arrow, and that Molpadia was slain
by Theseus. There is a monument also to Molpadia among the Athenians.
And as one ascends from the Piræus there are remains of the walls
which Conon re-erected after the sea-fight off Cnidus; for those which
Themistocles had built after the defeat of the Persians had been pulled
down during the rule of The Thirty Tyrants, as they were called. And
along the way the most notable tombs are those of Menander the son of
Diopeithes, and a cenotaph of Euripides without the body. For Euripides
was buried in Macedonia, having gone to the court of King Archelaus;
and the manner of his death, for it has been told by many, let it be as
they say. Poets even in those days lived with kings and earlier still,
for when Polycrates was tyrant at Samos Anacreon lived at his court,
and Æschylus and Simonides journeyed to Syracuse to the court of Hiero;
and to Dionysius, who was afterwards tyrant in Sicily, went Philoxenus;
and to Antigonus, king of the Macedonians, went Antagoras of Rhodes and
Aratus of Soli. On the other hand Hesiod and Homer either did not get
the chance of living at kings’ courts, or of their own accord didn’t
value it, the former because he lived in the country and shrank from
travelling, and the latter, having gone on his travels to very distant
parts, depreciated pecuniary assistance from the powerful in comparison
with the glory he had amongst most men, for from him too we have the
description of Demodocus’ being at the court of Alcinous, and that
Agamemnon left a poet with his wife. There is also a tomb not far from
the gates, with the statue of a soldier standing near a horse; who the
soldier is I don’t know, but Praxiteles modelled both the horse and the
soldier.

  As one enters into the city there is a building for the getting
ready of processions, which they conduct some annually, some at
various intervals. And near is the temple of Demeter, and the statues
in it are her and her daughter and Iacchus with a torch; and it is
written on the wall in Attic letters that they are the production of
Praxiteles. And not far from this temple is Poseidon on horseback, in
the act of hurling his spear at the giant Polybotes, in respect to
whom there is a story among the Coans as to the promontory of Chelone;
but the inscription of our days assigns the statue to another and not
to Poseidon. And there are porticoes from the gates to the Ceramicus,
and in front of them brazen statues of women and men who have obtained
some celebrity. And one of the porticoes has not only shrines of the
gods, but also what is called the gymnasium of Hermes; and there is in
it the house of Polytion, in which they say the most notable of the
Athenians imitated the Eleusinian mysteries. But in my time it was
consecrated to Dionysus. And this Dionysus they call Melpomenos for
the same reason that they call Apollo Musagetes. Here are statues of
Pæonian Athene and Zeus and Mnemosyne and the Muses, and Apollo (the
votive offering and work of Eubulides), and Acratus a satellite of
Dionysus: his face alone is worked in the wall. And next to the shrine
of Dionysus is a room with statues of earthenware, Amphictyon the king
of the Athenians feasting Dionysus and all the other gods. Here too is
Pegasus Eleutherensis, who introduced Dionysus to the Athenians; and
he was assisted by the oracle at Delphi, which foretold that the god
would come and settle there in the days of Icarius. And this is the
way Amphictyon got the kingdom. They say that Actæus was first king of
what is now Attica; and on his death Cecrops succeeded to the kingdom
having married Actæus’ daughter, and he had three daughters, Erse, and
Aglaurus, and Pandrosus, and one son, Erysichthon. He never reigned
over the Athenians, for he chanced to die in his father’s lifetime, and
the kingdom of Cecrops fell to Cranaus, the foremost of the Athenians
in power and influence. And they say that Cranaus had among other
daughters Atthis; from her they named the country Attica, which was
before called Actæa. And Amphictyon rose up in insurrection against
Cranaus, although he was married to his daughter, and deposed him from
the kingdom; but was himself afterwards ejected by Erichthonius and
his fellow conspirators. And they say that Erichthonius had no mortal
father, but that his parents were Hephæstus and Mother Earth.




CHAPTER III.


Now the place Ceramicus gets its name from the hero Ceramus, he too
reputed to be the son of Dionysus and Ariadne; and the first portico on
the right is called the royal portico, for there the king sits during
his yearly office which is called kingdom. On the roof of this portico
are statues of earthenware, Theseus hurling Sciron into the sea, and
Aurora carrying off Cephalus, who, being most handsome, was, they say,
carried off by enamoured Aurora, and his son was Phaethon. And he made
him sacristan of the temple. All this has been told by others, and by
Hesiod in his poem about women. And near the portico are statues of
Conon and his son Timotheus, and Evagoras, the king of the Cyprians,
who got the Phœnician triremes given to Conon by King Artaxerxes;
and he acted as an Athenian and one who had ancestral connection
with Salamis, for his pedigree went up to Teucer and the daughter of
Cinyras. Here too are statues of Zeus, surnamed Eleutherius, and the
Emperor Adrian, a benefactor to all the people he ruled over, and
especially to the city of the Athenians. And the portico built behind
has paintings of the so-called twelve gods. And Democracy and Demos and
Theseus are painted on the wall beyond. The painting represents Theseus
restoring to the Athenians political equality. The popular belief has
prevailed almost universally that Theseus played into the hands of
the people, and that from his time they remained under a democratical
government, till Pisistratus rose up and became tyrant. There are
other untrue traditions current among the mass of mankind, who have no
research and take for gospel all they heard as children in the choruses
and tragedies. One such tradition is that Theseus himself was king,
and that after the death of Menestheus his descendants continued kings
even to the fourth generation. But if I had a fancy for genealogies,
I should certainly have enumerated all the kings from Melanthus to
Cleidicus the son of Æsimidas as well as these.

  Here too is painted the action of the Athenians at Mantinea, who were
sent to aid the Lacedæmonians. Xenophon and others have written the
history of the entire war, the occupation of Cadmeia, and the slaughter
of the Lacedæmonians at Leuctra, and how the Bœotians made a raid into
the Peloponnese, and of the help that came to the Lacedæmonians from
the Athenians. And in the picture is the cavalry charge, the most
noted officers in which were on the Athenian side Gryllus, the son of
Xenophon, and in the Bœotian cavalry Epaminondas the Theban. These
paintings were painted for the Athenians by Euphranor, and in the
temple hard by he represented Apollo under the name Patrous. And in
front of the temple Leochares represented another Apollo, and Calamis
the Apollo who is called Averter of Evil. And they say the god got this
name by stopping from his oracle at Delphi the noisome pestilence, that
smote them at the same time as the Peloponnesian war. There is also a
temple to the Mother of the Gods wrought by Phidias, and next to it a
council chamber for those who are called The Five Hundred, who are
appointed annually. And in the council chamber are erected statues to
Zeus the Counsellor, and to Apollo (the artistic design of Pisias),
and to Demos (the work of Lyson). And the legislators were painted by
the Caunian Protogenes, but Olbiades painted Callippus, who led the
Athenians to Thermopylæ to prevent the invasion of the Galati into
Greece.




CHAPTER IV.


Now these Galati inhabit the remotest parts of Europe, near a mighty
sea, not navigable where they live: it has tides and breakers and
sea monsters quite unlike those in any other sea: and through their
territory flows the river Eridanus, by whose banks people think the
daughters of the sun lament the fate of their brother Phaethon. And
it is only of late that the name Galati has prevailed among them:
for originally they were called Celts both by themselves and by all
other nations. And an army gathered together by them marched towards
the Ionian Sea, and dispossessed all the nations of Illyria and all
that dwelt between them and the Macedonians, and even the Macedonians
themselves, and overran Thessaly. And when they got near to Thermopylæ,
most of the Greeks did not interfere with their onward march,
remembering how badly handled they had formerly been by Alexander
and Philip, and how subsequently Antipater and Cassander had nearly
ruined Greece; so that, on account of their weakness, they did not
consider it disgraceful individually that a general defence should be
abandoned. But the Athenians, although they had suffered more than
any other of the Greeks during the long Macedonian war, and had had
great losses in battles, yet resolved to go forth to Thermopylæ with
those of the Greeks who volunteered, having chosen this Callippus as
their General. And having occupied the narrowest pass they endeavoured
to bar the passage of the barbarians into Greece. But the Celts
having discovered the same defile by which Ephialtes the Trachinian
had formerly conducted the Persians, and having routed those of the
Phocians who were posted there in battle array, crossed Mount Œta
unbeknown to the Greeks. Then it was that the Athenians displayed
themselves to the Greeks as most worthy, by their brave defence
against the barbarians, being taken both in front and flank. But those
suffered most that were in their ships, inasmuch as the Lamiac Gulf was
full of mud near Thermopylæ; the explanation is, as it seems to me,
that here warm springs have their outlet into the sea. Here therefore
they suffered much. For, having taken on board their comrades, they
were obliged to sail over mud in vessels heavy with men and armour.
Thus did the Athenians endeavour to save the Greeks in the manner I
have described. But the Galati having got inside Pylæ, and not caring
to take the other fortified towns, were most anxious to plunder the
treasures of the god at Delphi. And the people of Delphi, and those
of the Phocians who dwelt in the cities round Parnassus, drew up in
battle array against them. A contingency of the Ætolians also arrived:
and you must know that at that era the Ætolians were eminent for manly
vigour. And when the armies engaged not only did lightnings dismay the
Galati, and fragments of rock coming down on them from Parnassus, but
three mighty warriors pressed them hard, two, they say, came from the
Hyperboreans, Hyperochus and Amadocus, and the third was Pyrrhus, the
son of Achilles. And in consequence of this aid the Delphians offer
sacrifice to Pyrrhus, though before they held his tomb in dishonour as
that of an enemy. But the greater part of the Galati having crossed
into Asia Minor in their ships, ravaged its maritime parts. And some
time afterwards the inhabitants of Pergamum, which in old times was
called Teuthrania, drove the Galati from the sea into the region now
called Galatia. They lived in the region east of the river Sangarius,
having captured Ancyra, a city of the Phrygians which Midas the son of
Gordias had formerly built. And the anchor which Midas found was still,
even in my time, in the temple of Zeus, and the well shown which was
called Midas’ well: which Midas, they say, poured wine into that he
might capture Silenus. As well as Ancyra they captured Pessinus near
the mountain Agdistis, where they say Atte was buried. And the people
of Pergamum have spoils of the Galati, and there is a painting of their
action with the Galati. And the region which the people of Pergamum
inhabit was in old times, they say, sacred to the Cabiri. And they
claim to be Arcadians who crossed over with Telephus into Asia Minor.
Of their other wars, if they fought any, the fame has not universally
spread: but three most notable exploits have been performed by them,
their gaining dominion over the southern part of Asia Minor, and their
expulsion of the Galati from thence, and their venture under Telephus
against the forces of Agamemnon, when the Greeks, unable to find Ilium,
ravaged the Mysian plain, thinking it was Trojan territory. But I
return to where I made my digression from.




CHAPTER V.


Near the council chamber of The Five Hundred is the room called the
Rotunda, and here the Prytanes sacrifice, and there are some silver
statues not very large. And higher up are some statues of the heroes,
from whom the tribes of the Athenians in later times got their names.
And who made the tribes ten instead of four, and changed their names
from the old ones, has been told by Herodotus. And of the heroes who
gave their names to the tribes, (_Eponymus_ is the name they give
them), are Hippothoon, the son of Poseidon by Alope the daughter
of Cercyon, and Antiochus, one of the sons of Hercules by Meda the
daughter of Phylas, and the third Ajax, the son of Telamon; and of the
Athenians Leo, who is said to have devoted all his daughters for the
public weal at the bidding of the oracle. Erechtheus also is among
the Eponymi, who conquered the Eleusinians in battle, and slew their
commander Immaradus, the son of Eumolpus; also Ægius, and Œneus the
illegitimate son of Pandion, and of the sons of Theseus Acamas. And
what Cecrops and Pandion they hold in honour, (for I saw their statues
too among the Eponymi), I do not know, for there were two of each; the
first Cecrops, that was king, married the daughter of Actæus, and the
other, who settled at Eubœa, was the son of Erechtheus, the grandson
of Pandion and the great grandson of Erichthonius, and the two Pandion
kings were the son of Erichthonius and the son of Cecrops the younger.
The latter was deposed from his kingdom by the Metionidæ, and when he
fled to Megara, the daughter of whose king he had married, his sons
were banished with him. And it is said that Pandion died there of
illness, and his tomb is near the sea in Megara, on the rock that is
called the rock of Athene the Diver. But his sons returned from exile
at Megara, and expelled the Metionidæ, and Ægeus, being the eldest, had
the sovereignty over the Athenians. Pandion also reared daughters, but
not with good fortune, nor had they any sons to avenge him. And yet for
the love of power he had made affinity with the king of Thrace. But
man has no power to escape what is willed by the Deity. They say that
Tereus (though married to Procne) dishonoured Philomela, not acting
according to the law of the Greeks: and, having still further murdered
the damsel, he compelled the women to punish him. There is also another
statue erected to Pandion in the Acropolis, well worth seeing. These
are the ancient Eponymi of the Athenians. And after these they have
as Eponymi Attalus the Mysian, and Ptolemy the Egyptian, and, in my
time, the Emperor Adrian, who worshipped the gods more religiously than
anyone, and who contributed most to the individual happiness of his
subjects. And he never willingly undertook any war, only he punished
the revolt of the Hebrews who live beyond the Syrians. And as to the
temples of the gods, part of which he originally built, and part of
which he adorned with votive offerings and decorations, or of the gifts
which he gave to the Greek cities and to those of the barbarians who
asked for them, all these good deeds of his are written up at Athens,
in the temple common to all the gods.




CHAPTER VI.


As to the actions of Attalus and Ptolemy, not only are they become more
ancient from the progress of time, so that the fame of them no longer
remains, but also those who lived with those kings in former days
neglected to register their exploits. I thought it well therefore to
record whatever works they did, and how it was that the government of
Egypt and of the Mysi, and of the neighbouring nations, fell to their
fathers. Ptolemy, the Macedonians think, was really the son of Philip
the son of Amyntas, (but putatively the son of Lagus), for his mother,
they say, was pregnant when she was given to Lagus to wife by Philip.
And they say that Ptolemy not only distinguished himself brilliantly
in Asia Minor, but, when danger befel Alexander at Oxydracæ, he of
all his companions was foremost to bring him aid. And upon the death
of Alexander, he it was who mainly resisted those who wished to give
all the dominions of Alexander to Aridæus the son of Philip, and he
again was responsible for the different nationalities being divided
into kingdoms. And he himself crossed into Egypt and slew Cleomenes,
whom Alexander had made satrap of Egypt, thinking him friendly to
Perdiccas and therefore not loyal to himself, and persuaded those of
the Macedonians who were appointed to carry the dead body of Alexander
to Ægæ to hand it over to him, and buried him at Memphis with the
customary Macedonian rites; but, feeling sure that Perdiccas would go
to war with him, he filled Egypt with garrisons. And Perdiccas, to
give a specious colour to his expedition, led about with him Aridæus
the son of Philip, and the lad Alexander, the son of Alexander by
Roxana the daughter of Oxyartes, but really was plotting to take away
the kingdom of Egypt from Ptolemy. But having been thrust out of
Egypt, and consequently losing his former prestige as a general, and
having incurred odium among the Macedonians on other grounds, he was
assassinated by his bodyguard. The death of Perdiccas roused Ptolemy
to immediate action: simultaneously he seized Syria and Phœnicia,
welcomed Seleucus the son of Antiochus, a fugitive who had been driven
into exile by Antigonus, and made preparations to take the field in
person against Antigonus. And Cassander the son of Antipater, and
Lysimachus king of Thrace, he persuaded to join him in the war, saying
that the exile of Seleucus and the aggrandisement of Antigonus was a
common danger to all of them. Now Antigonus for a time went on with
his preparations, but by no means courted war. But when he heard that
Ptolemy had gone to Libya to put down a revolt of the people of Cyrene,
forthwith he took Syria and Phœnicia by a _coup-de-main_, and, handing
them over to his son Demetrius, a boy in years a man in intellect,
returned to the Hellespont. But before getting there, on hearing
that Demetrius had been beaten in battle by Ptolemy, he led his army
back again. But Demetrius, so far from yielding ground altogether to
Ptolemy, planned an ambush and cut to pieces a few of the Egyptians.
And now, upon Antigonus’ coming up, Ptolemy did not wait for him, but
retired into Egypt. And when the winter was over Demetrius sailed to
Cyprus and beat Menelaus, Ptolemy’s satrap, in a naval engagement, and
then Ptolemy himself, as he tried to force his way through. And he
fled into Egypt and was blockaded both by land and sea by Antigonus
and Demetrius. But Ptolemy, although in great straits, yet preserved
his kingdom by stationing himself with his army at Pelusium on the
_qui vive_, and by keeping the enemy from the river with his fleet.
And Antigonus had no further hope that he could take Egypt in the
present state of affairs, so he despatched Demetrius to the Rhodians
with a large army and ships, hoping that, if he could get possession
of Rhodes, he could use it as his base against the Egyptians. But not
only did the Rhodians exhibit great daring and ingenuity against their
besiegers, but also Ptolemy himself to the utmost of his power assisted
them in the war. And Antigonus, though unsuccessful with Rhodes and
Egypt, ventured not long afterwards to fight against Lysimachus and
Cassander and the army of Seleucus, and lost the greater part of his
forces, and himself died mainly from being worn out by the length of
the war against Eumenes. And of the kings that put down the power of
Antigonus I think the most unscrupulous was Cassander, who, having
preserved his rule over the Macedonians only owing to Antigonus, went
and fought against a man that had been his benefactor. And after the
death of Antigonus, Ptolemy again took Syria and Cyprus, and restored
Pyrrhus to Thesprotian Epirus. And when Cyrene revolted, Magas the son
of Berenice, who was at this time the wife of Ptolemy, took it in the
fifth year after the revolt. Now if this Ptolemy was really the son
of Philip the son of Amyntas, it will be clear that he inherited this
madness for women from his father, who, though married to Eurydice,
the daughter of Antipater, and having children by her, yet fell in love
with Berenice, (whom Antipater had sent into Egypt as a companion to
Eurydice), and so enamoured was he of her that he had children by her,
and when his end was near willed to reign over Egypt Ptolemy, (from
whom the Athenians name one tribe), his son by Berenice and not by
Eurydice.




CHAPTER VII.


This Ptolemy being enamoured of Arsinoe, his sister on both sides,
married her, doing what was by no means usual among the Macedonians,
but not uncommon among his Egyptian subjects. And next he slew his
brother Argæus plotting against him, as was said. And he brought the
corpse of Alexander from Memphis. And he slew also another brother,
the son of Eurydice, observing that he was trying to make the Cyprians
revolt. And Magas the uterine brother of Ptolemy, (being the son of
Berenice and one Philip, a Macedonian but one of the common people and
otherwise unknown), who had been chosen by his mother to be governor
of Cyrene, at this time persuaded the people of Cyrene to revolt from
Ptolemy and marched with an army for Egypt. And Ptolemy, having guarded
the approaches, awaited the arrival of the men of Cyrene; but Magas
having had news brought him on the road that the Marmaridæ had revolted
from him, (now the Marmaridæ are a tribe of Libyan Nomads), endeavoured
to get back to Cyrene at once. And Ptolemy, intending to follow him,
was prevented by the following reason. Among some of his defensive
operations against Magas, he had invited in some foreign mercenaries,
and among others some 4,000 Galati; but finding that they were plotting
to make themselves masters of Egypt, he sent them down to the Nile to a
desert island. And here they perished, partly by one another’s sword,
partly by famine. And Magas being the husband of Apame, the daughter
of Antiochus the son of Seleucus, persuaded Antiochus to violate the
conditions which his father Seleucus had made with Ptolemy, and to
lead an army into Egypt. But as he was preparing to do so, Ptolemy
sent into all parts of Antichus’ dominions guerilla troops to ravage
the country where the defenders were weak, and more formidable bodies
he checked with his army, so that Antiochus had no longer the chance
to invade Egypt. I have previously described how this Ptolemy sent a
fleet to aid the Athenians against Antigonus and the Macedonians; but,
indeed, the Athenians derived no great benefit from it. Now his sons
were not by Arsinoe his sister, but by the daughter of Lysimachus,
for although he was married to his sister and lived with her, she
pre-deceased him and was childless, and the district Arsinoites is
named after her.




CHAPTER VIII.


Our subject now demands that we should relate the doings of Attalus,
for he is also one of the Athenian Eponymi. A Macedonian by name
Docimus, one of Antigonus’ generals, who afterwards gave himself and
his fortune into the hands of Lysimachus, had a Paphlagonian eunuch
called Philetærus. Now all the circumstances of Philetærus’ revolt from
Lysimachus, and how he invited in Seleucus, shall be narrated by me
in my account of Lysimachus. But this Attalus was the son of Attalus,
and nephew of Philetærus, and got the kingdom from Eumenes his cousin
handing it over to him. And this is the greatest of his exploits, that
he compelled the Galati to leave the coast and go inland to Galatia,
the country which they now inhabit.

  And next to the statues of the Eponymi are images of the gods,
Amphiaraus and Peace with Wealth as a boy in her arms. Here, too, are
statues in bronze of Lycurgus the son of Lycophron, and of Callias who
negotiated peace, as most of the Athenians say, between the Greeks
and Artaxerxes the son of Xerxes. Here, too, is Demosthenes, whom the
Athenians drove into exile to Calauria, the island near Trœzen, and
after having recalled him drove him into exile a second time after
the defeat at Lamia. And when Demosthenes went into exile the second
time, he crossed over again to Calauria, where he died by taking
poison. And he was the only exile who was not handed over to Antipater
and the Macedonians by Archias. Now this Archias, who was a native
of Thurii, acted very inhumanly. All who had opposed the Macedonians
before the disaster which befel the Greeks in Thessaly, Archias handed
over to Antipater for punishment. Now this was the end of Demosthenes’
excessive affection for the Athenians. And it seems to me deserving of
record, that a man who had been cruelly exiled for his policy, and had
yet believed in the democracy, came to a bad end.

  And near the statue of Demosthenes is the temple of Ares, where are
two images of Aphrodite, and one of Ares designed by Alcamenes, and one
of Athene designed by a Parian by name Locrus. Here too is an image of
Enyo by the sons of Praxiteles. And round the temple are statues of
Hercules, and Theseus, and Apollo with his long hair in a fillet: and
statues of Calades, who was a legislator of the Athenians according
to tradition, and of Pindar, who amongst other honour obtained this
statue from the Athenians because he praised them in an Ode. And at no
great distance are statues of Harmodius and Aristogiton, the murderers
of Hipparchus: the motive and manner of this murder has been told by
others. And of these statues some are by Critias, but the oldest ones
by Antenor. And although Xerxes when he captured Athens, (the Athenians
having left the city), took them off as booty, Antiochus sent them back
afterwards to the Athenians.

  And in the theatre, which they call Odeum, there are statues, in the
entrance, of the Egyptian kings. Their names are all Ptolemy alike,
but each has another distinguishing name also. Thus they call one
Philometor, and another Philadelphus, and the son of Lagus Soter, a
name the Rhodians gave him. Philadelphus is the one whom I have before
made mention of as one of the Eponymi. And near him is also a statue of
his sister Arsinoe.




CHAPTER IX.


Now the Ptolemy called Philometor is the eighth in descent from
Ptolemy the son of Lagus, and he got his name in irony; for none of
these kings that we know of was so hated by their mother as he was;
for though he was the eldest of her sons she would not allow them to
call him to the kingdom, but got him banished to Cyprus by his father
previously. Now of this dislike of Cleopatra to her son they allege
other motives, but especially this one, that she thought Alexander, the
younger of her sons, would be more obsequious to her. And therefore she
urged the Egyptians to choose Alexander for their king. And when the
people opposed her in this, she sent Alexander to Cyprus, nominally
as general, but really because she wished through him to make herself
more formidable to Philometor. And at last having mutilated those of
the eunuchs whom she thought most friendly, she brought them before the
populace, and pretended that she was plotted against by Philometor,
and that the eunuchs had been treated in that shameful manner by
him. And the Alexandrians were eager to kill Philometor, but, as he
got on shipboard and escaped them, they made Alexander king on his
return from Cyprus. But Cleopatra was punished eventually for her
getting Philometor banished by being slain by Alexander, whom she had
got appointed king over the Egyptians. And the crime being detected,
and Alexander fleeing from fear of the citizens, Philometor quietly
returned from exile and a second time held Egypt, and warred against
the Thebans who had revolted. And having reduced them in the third
year after the revolt, he punished them so severely that there was no
vestige left them of their ancient prosperity, which had reached such
a pitch that they excelled in wealth the wealthiest of the Greeks,
even the treasures of the temple at Delphi and the Orchomenians. And
Philometor not long after meeting the common fate, the Athenians
who had been well treated by him in many respects that I need not
enumerate, erected a brazen statue both of him and Berenice, his only
legitimate child. And next to the Egyptian kings are statues of Philip
and his son Alexander. They performed greater exploits than to be mere
appendages to an account of something else. To the other Egyptian kings
gifts were given as being of real merit and benefactors, but to Philip
and Alexander more, from the flattery of the community towards them,
for they also honoured Lysimachus by a statue, not so much out of good
will as thinking him useful under existing circumstances.

  Now this Lysimachus was by birth a Macedonian and the armour-bearer
of Alexander, whom Alexander once in anger shut up in a building with a
lion and found him victorious over the beast. In all other respects he
continued to admire him, and held him in honour as among the foremost
of the Macedonians. And after Alexander’s death Lysimachus ruled over
those Thracians who were contiguous to the Macedonians, over whom
Alexander had ruled, and still earlier Philip. And these would be no
very great portion of Thrace. Now no nations are more populous than
all the Thracians, except the Celts, if one compares one race with
another; and that is why none of the Romans ever subdued all Thrace at
an earlier period. But all Thrace is now subject to the Romans, and
as much of the Celtic land as they think useless from the excessive
cold and inferiority of the soil has been purposely overlooked by
them, but the valuable parts they stick to. Now Lysimachus at this
period fought with the Odrysæ first of all his neighbours, and next
went on an expedition against Dromichetes and the Getæ. And fighting
with men not inexperienced in war, and in number far superior, he
himself getting into the greatest danger, fled for his life; and his
son Agathocles, now first accompanying his father on campaign, was
captured by the Getæ. And Lysimachus after this, being unfortunate in
battles and being greatly concerned at the capture of his son, made a
peace with Dromichetes, abandoning to Getes his possessions across the
Ister, and giving him his daughter in marriage, more of necessity than
choice. But some say that it was not Agathocles who was captured, but
Lysimachus himself, and that he was ransomed by Agathocles negotiating
with Getes on his account. And when he returned he brought with him
for Agathocles a wife in Lysandra, the daughter of Ptolemy Lagus
and Eurydice. And he crossed over into Asia Minor in his fleet, and
destroyed the rule of Antigonus. And he built the present city of the
Ephesians near the sea, bringing into it as settlers Lebedians and
Colophonians, after destroying their cities, so that Phœnix, the Iambic
writer, laments the capture of Colophon. Hermesianax, the Elegiac
writer, could not have lived, it seems to me, up to this date; for else
he would surely have written an elegy over the capture of Colophon.
Lysimachus also waged war against Pyrrhus the son of Æacides. And
watching for his departure from Epirus, as indeed he was wandering
most of his time, he ravaged all the rest of Epirus, and even meddled
with the tombs of the kings. I can scarce believe it, but Hieronymus
of Cardia has recorded that Lysimachus took up the tombs of the dead
and strewed the bones about. But this Hieronymus has the reputation
even on other grounds of having written with hostility against all the
kings except Antigonus, and of not having been altogether just even to
him. And in this account of the tombs in Epirus he clearly must have
invented the calumny, that a Macedonian would interfere with the tombs
of the dead. And besides it appears that Lysimachus did not know that
the people of Epirus were not only the ancestors of Pyrrhus but also of
Alexander; for Alexander was not only a native of Epirus, but on his
mother’s side one of the Æacidæ. And the subsequent alliance between
Pyrrhus and Lysimachus proves that if they did fight together there was
no irreconcilable animosity between them. But perhaps Hieronymus had
other causes of complaint against Lysimachus besides the chief one that
he destroyed the city of Cardia, and built instead of it Lysimachia on
the Isthmus of the Thracian Chersonese.




CHAPTER X.


Now as long as Aridæus, and after him Cassander and his sons, ruled,
there was friendship between Lysimachus and the Macedonians; but when
the kingdom came to Demetrius the son of Antigonus, then at once
Lysimachus thought war would be waged against him by Demetrius, and
preferred to take the initiative himself, knowing that it was a family
tradition with Demetrius to wish to be grasping something, and at
the same time observing that he had come to Macedonia on being sent
for by Alexander the son of Cassander, and on his arrival had killed
Alexander and taken in his stead the kingdom of the Macedonians. For
these reasons he fought with Demetrius at Amphipolis and was within an
ace of being ejected from Thrace, but through the help of Pyrrhus he
retained Thrace and afterwards ruled the Nestians and Macedonians also.
But the greater part of Macedonia Pyrrhus kept for himself, coming with
a force from Epirus and being useful to Lysimachus at that time. But
when Demetrius crossed over into Asia Minor and fought with Seleucus,
as long as the fortunes of Demetrius lasted the alliance between
Pyrrhus and Lysimachus remained unbroken; but when Demetrius got into
the power of Seleucus the friendship was dissolved, and Lysimachus
fought with Antigonus, the son of Demetrius, and with Pyrrhus himself,
and was easily victorious and got Macedonia and compelled Pyrrhus to
return to Epirus. Now many misfortunes are wont to come on men through
love. For Lysimachus being already advanced in age, and being reputed
fortunate in respect to his offspring, and although his son Agathocles
had children by Lysandra, yet married Arsinoe Lysandra’s sister. And
it is said that this Arsinoe, fearing for her children that after
the death of Lysimachus they would be in the hands of Agathocles,
for these reasons conspired against Agathocles. And some writers
have alleged that Arsinoe was violently in love with Agathocles,
but being disappointed in this plotted his death. And they say that
afterwards Lysimachus came to know of the awful doings of his wife,
when it was too late to be of any service to him, being entirely
deprived of his friends. For when Lysimachus permitted Arsinoe to put
Agathocles to death, Lysandra fled to Seleucus, taking with her her
sons and brothers, and in consequence of what had happened they fled
for refuge to Ptolemy. And these fugitives to the court of Seleucus
were accompanied by Alexander also, the son of Lysimachus by his wife
Odrysiades. And they, having got to Babylon, besought Seleucus to go
to war with Lysimachus; and Philetærus at the same time, who had had
all the money of Lysimachus entrusted to him, indignant at the death
of Agathocles and thinking the conduct of Arsinoe suspicious, occupied
Pergamum beyond the river Caicus, and sent an envoy and offered himself
and his money to Seleucus. And Lysimachus, learning all this, crossed
into Asia Minor forthwith, and himself began the war, and encountering
Seleucus was badly beaten and himself killed. And Alexander, who
was his son by his wife Odrysiades, after much entreaty to Lysandra
recovered his corpse, and subsequently conveyed it to the Chersonese
and buried it there, where even now his tomb is to be seen, between the
village Cardia and Pactye. Such was the fate of Lysimachus.




CHAPTER XI.


The Athenians also have a statue of Pyrrhus. This Pyrrhus was only
related to Alexander by ancestry. For Pyrrhus was the son of Æacides
the son of Arybbas, whereas Alexander was the son of Olympias the
daughter of Neoptolemus. Now, Neoptolemus and Arybbas had the same
father, Alcetas the son of Tharypus. And from Tharypus to Pyrrhus,
the son of Achilles, are fifteen generations. For he first, after the
capture of Ilium, neglected, returning home to Thessaly, and removed to
Epirus and dwelt there in accordance with the oracles of Helenus. And
he had no son by Hermione, but by Andromache he had Molossus and Pielus
and the youngest Pergamus. And Helenus also had a son Cestrinus by
Andromache, whom he married after the death of Pyrrhus at Delphi. And
when Helenus died having handed over the kingdom to Molossus the son
of Pyrrhus, Cestrinus with the Epirotes who volunteered to go with him
occupied the region across the river Thyamis, and Pergamus, crossing
into Asia Minor, killed Arius the king of Teuthrania in single combat
for the sovereignty of the country, and gave the city his own name,
which it now has. There is also to this day a temple of Andromache, who
accompanied him, in the city. But Pielus remained at home in Epirus,
and it was to him and not to Molossus that Pyrrhus the son of Æacides
and his fathers traced up their ancestry. Now up to the days of Alcetas
the son of Tharypus Epirus was under one king; but the sons of Alcetas
after some quarrelling changed the government to an equal share for
each, and remained loyal to that agreement; and afterwards Alexander
the son of Neoptolemus died in Lucania, and Olympias returned to
Epirus from fear of Antipater, and Æacides, the son of Arybbas, in all
respects remained loyal to Olympias, and even joined her in fighting
against Aridæus and the Macedonians, though the people of Epirus were
unwilling to enter into it. But as Olympias, when she conquered, had
acted infamously in connection with the death of Aridæus, and far more
so to the Macedonians, and consequently was thought afterwards to
have only met with her deserts from Cassander, the Epirotes would not
receive Æacides for a time owing to their hostility against Olympias;
and when he obtained pardon from them some time after Cassander again
prevented his return to Epirus. And a battle being fought between
Philip (the brother of Cassander) and Æacides at Œnidæ, Æacides was
wounded and died no long time after. And the people of Epirus made
Alcetas king, the son of Arybbas and elder brother of Æacides, a man
on previous occasions of ungovernable temper, and for that very reason
banished by his father. And now on his arrival he immediately so madly
raged against the people of Epirus, that they rose up against him by
night and killed him and his sons. And when they had killed him they
brought back from exile Pyrrhus the son of Æacides. And immediately
on his arrival Cassander marched against him, as being young and not
firmly established in the sovereignty. But Pyrrhus, on the invasion of
the Macedonians, went to Egypt to Ptolemy the son of Lagus; and Ptolemy
gave him as wife the uterine sister of his own children, and restored
him with a force of Egyptians. And Pyrrhus, on becoming king, attacked
the Corcyræans first of the Greeks, seeing that the island of Corcyra
lay opposite to his own territory, and not wishing it to be a base
for operations against him. And after the capture of Corcyra all the
defeats he met with fighting against Lysimachus, and how after he had
driven Demetrius out of Macedonia he ruled there until he in turn was
ejected by Lysimachus,--all these, the most important events at that
time in Pyrrhus’ life, have been already narrated by me in connection
with Lysimachus. And we know of no Greek before Pyrrhus that warred
with the Romans. For there is no record of any engagement between
Æneas and Diomede and the Argives with him; and the Athenians, who
were very ambitious and desired to reduce all Italy, were prevented by
the disaster at Syracuse from attacking the Romans; and Alexander the
son of Neoptolemus, of the same race as Pyrrhus but older in age, was
prevented by his death in Lucania from coming to blows with the Romans.




CHAPTER XII.


So Pyrrhus is the first that crossed the Ionian Sea from Greece
to fight against the Romans. And he crossed at the invitation of
the people of Tarentum, who had had earlier than this a war of
long standing with the Romans: and being unable to resist them by
themselves, (and they had already done services to Pyrrhus, for they
had aided him with their fleet when he was warring against Corcyra),
their envoys won Pyrrhus over, giving him to understand that it would
be for the happiness of all Greece, and that it would not be honourable
for him to leave them in the lurch, inasmuch as they were friends and
on the present occasion suppliants. And as the envoys urged these
things, the remembrance of the capture of Ilium came to Pyrrhus,
and he hoped the same would happen to him: for he, a descendant of
Achilles, would be warring against colonies of Trojans. And as the
idea pleased him, (and he was not the man to loiter at anything he
had a mind for), he forthwith equipped men-of-war and transports and
got ready cavalry and infantry to take with him. Now, there are some
books written by men not remarkable for historical power still extant,
called COMMENTARIES OF EVENTS. As often as I read them I am inclined to
marvel, not only at the daring of Pyrrhus which he displayed in action,
but also at the forethought which he always exhibited. On this occasion
he crossed over into Italy in his ships unbeknown to the Romans, and
his arrival was unknown to them until, (an attack being made by them
upon the people of Tarentum), he first showed himself at the head of
his army, and, attacking them contrary to their expectation, threw
them into confusion as was only likely. And, knowing full well that
he was not a match for the Romans in fighting, he contrived to let
loose elephants upon them. Now Alexander was the first European who
had elephants, after the conquest of Porus and India: and on his death
other European kings had them, and Antigonus a very large quantity of
them: and the elephants of Pyrrhus were captured by him in the battle
with Demetrius. And now on their appearance a panic seized the Romans,
who thought they were something superhuman. For the use of ivory indeed
all nations have clearly known from the earliest times; but the animals
themselves, until the Macedonians crossed into Asia, no nations had
seen at all except the Indians and Libyans and the adjacent nations.
And Homer proves this, who has represented the beds and houses of the
wealthier of the kings as decked with ivory, but has made no mention
whatever of the elephant. And if he had seen or heard of them he would,
I think, have recorded them rather than the battle of the Pygmies
and cranes. Pyrrhus was also invited into Sicily by an embassy of
Syracusans. For the Carthaginians used to cross over and take the Greek
cities in Sicily, and Syracuse the only one left they were blockading
and besieging. And Pyrrhus, hearing this from the envoys, left Tarentum
and the Italians that dwelt on the headland, and crossed over into
Sicily and compelled the Carthaginians to raise the siege. And, having
overweening self-confidence, he was elated to fight on sea against
the Carthaginians, (who were the greatest maritime nation of all the
barbarians of that day, having been originally Tyrians and Phœnicians),
with the natives of Epirus only, who even after the capture of Ilium
were most of them unacquainted with the sea, and knew not the use of
salt. As that line of Homer, in the “Odyssey,” bears me out:

    “Men who know not the sea, nor eat food seasoned with salt.”[3]




CHAPTER XIII.


Then Pyrrhus, after his defeat, sailed for Tarentum with the remnant of
his fleet. There his fortunes suffered great reverses, and he contrived
his flight in the following manner, (for he knew that the Romans would
not let him go scot-free). On his return from Sicily he first sent
letters everywhere to Asia Minor and Antigonus, asking for soldiers
from some of the kings and for money from others, and for both from
Antigonus. And when the messengers returned and their letters were
given to him, he called together a council of the chief men of Epirus
and Tarentum, and read none of the letters which he had with him but
merely said that aid would come. And quickly a report spread among the
Romans, that the Macedonians and other tribes of Asia Minor were going
to come over to the help of Pyrrhus. So the Romans when they heard
this remained quiet, and Pyrrhus under the shelter of the next night
crossed over to the mountains which they call Ceraunia. And after this
reverse in Italy he remained quiet with his forces for some time, and
then proclaimed war against Antigonus, bringing other charges against
him but mainly because he had failed to bring reinforcements to Italy.
And having beaten Antigonus’ own troops, and the foreign contingent
with him of the Galati, he pursued them to the maritime cities, and
became master of Upper Macedonia and Thessaly. And the greatness of
the battle and the magnitude of Pyrrhus’ victory are shown by the arms
of the Galati hung up in the temple of Athene Itonia between Pheræ and
Larissa, and the inscription on them is as follows:

  “Molossian Pyrrhus hung up these shields of the brave Galati to
Itonian Athene, when he had destroyed all the host of Antigonus. No
great wonder. The Æacidæ are warriors now as formerly.”

  The shields of the Galati he put here, but those of the Macedonians
he hung up to Zeus of the Macedonians at Dodona. And the following is
the inscription on them:

    “These formerly ravaged the wealthy Asian territory,
      These also brought slavery to the Greeks;
    But now hang up on the pillars in the house of Zeus
      The spoils snatched from boasting Macedonia.”

  But Pyrrhus was prevented from overthrowing the Macedonians entirely,
though he came within an ace of it, and was only too ready always to
seize whatever was at his feet, by Cleonymus. Now this Cleonymus, who
had persuaded Pyrrhus to leave Macedonia and come to the Peloponnese,
although a Lacedæmonian led a hostile force into the territory of the
Lacedæmonians, for the reason which I shall give after his pedigree.
Pausanias that led the Greeks at Platæa had a son Pleistoanax, and he a
son Pausanias, and he a son Cleombrotus, who fought against Epaminondas
and the Thebans, and was killed at Leuctra. And Cleombrotus had two
sons Agesipolis and Cleomenes, and the former dying childless Cleomenes
had the kingdom. And he had two sons, the elder Acrotatus and the
younger Cleonymus. And Acrotatus dying first and after him Cleomenes,
there was a dispute who should be king between Acrotatus’ son, Areus,
and Cleonymus. And Cleonymus, determined to get the kingdom whether
or no, called in Pyrrhus into the country. And the Lacedæmonians
before Leuctra had met with no reverse, so that they would not admit
they could be conquered by a land army: for in the case of Leonidas
they said his followers were not sufficient to completely destroy the
Persians, and as for the exploit of Demosthenes and the Athenians at
the island of Sphacteria, they said that was a fluke of war and not
a genuine victory. But after their first reverse in Bœotia, they had
a second severe one with Antipater and the Macedonians: and thirdly
the war with Demetrius came on the land as an unexpected evil. And
when fourthly Pyrrhus invaded them, when they saw the enemy’s army,
they drew up in battle array together with their allies from Argos and
Messene. And Pyrrhus conquered and was within an ace of taking Sparta
at the first assault; but after having ravaged their territory and got
much booty he rested for awhile. And the Spartans prepared for a siege,
Sparta even before in the war with Demetrius having been fortified by
deep trenches and strong palisades, and in the weakest parts by special
works. And during this time and the long Laconian war Antigonus having
fortified the towns of the Macedonians pressed into the Peloponnese,
perceiving that Pyrrhus, if he should subdue Sparta and most of the
Peloponnese, would not go into Epirus, but into Macedonia again and to
the war sure to come there. And when Antigonus was intending to move
his army from Argos into Spartan territory, Pyrrhus himself had arrived
at Argos. And, being victorious, he followed the fugitives and entered
the city with them, and, as was likely, his army dispersed into all
quarters of the city. And as they were fighting in the temples and
houses and alleys and in all parts of the city promiscuously, Pyrrhus
was left all alone and got wounded in the head. They say Pyrrhus was
killed by a tile thrown by a woman: but the Argives say it was not a
woman that slew him, but Demeter in the form of a woman. This is the
account which the Argives themselves give of the death of Pyrrhus;
this is also what Lyceas, the expounder of his country’s usages, has
written in his verses. And on the spot where Pyrrhus died was erected
a temple to Demeter in accordance with the oracle of the god: and in
it was Pyrrhus buried. I am astonished that of all those who were
called Æacidæ their end happened in the same supernatural manner, since
Homer says Achilles was slain by Alexander the son of Priam and by
Apollo; and Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles, was ordered to be slain by
the Pythian oracle at Delphi; and this son of Æacides met his fate as
has been recorded by the Argives and sung by Lyceas. And yet this is
different to the account given by Hieronymus of Cardia: for one that
lives with a king must needs write history like a courtier. And if
Philistus, hoping for a return to Syracuse, was justified in concealing
the most flagitious acts of Dionysius, then Hieronymus, I ween, had
good excuse for writing to please Antigonus. Such was the end of the
glory of Epirus.




CHAPTER XIV.


And as one enters the Odeum at Athens, there is a Dionysus and other
things worth seeing. And near is a spring called the Nine Springs
constructed so by Pisistratus: for there are wells all over the city
but this is the only spring. And two temples have been built over the
spring, one to Demeter and the other to Proserpine; in one of them
is a statue to Triptolemus, about whom I will record the traditions,
omitting what is said about Deiope. Now the Argives are those of the
Greeks who chiefly dispute with the Athenians their rival claims to
antiquity, and assert that they have received gifts from the gods,
just as among the barbarians the Egyptians have similar disputes with
the Phrygians. The story goes then that when Demeter came to Argos
Pelasgus received her into his house, and that Chrysanthis, knowing of
the rape of Proserpine, informed her of it: and afterwards Trochilus
the initiating priest fled they say from Argos in consequence of the
hatred of Agenor, and came to Attica, and there married a wife from
Eleusis, and had children by her, Eubules and Triptolemus. This is
the account of the Argives. But the Athenians and neighbouring tribes
know that Triptolemus, the son of Celeus, was the first who sowed
corn in the fields. And it is sung by Musæus, (if indeed the lines
are by Musæus), that Triptolemus was the son of Ocean and Earth, and
it is sung by Orpheus, (if these lines again are by Orpheus, which I
doubt), that Dysaules was the father of Eubules and Triptolemus, and
that Demeter taught them how to sow corn because they had given her
information about the rape of her daughter. But the Athenian Chœrilus,
in the play called “Alope,” says that Cercyon and Triptolemus were
brothers, that their mother was a daughter of Amphictyon, and that the
father of Triptolemus was Rharus, and the father of Cercyon Poseidon.
And as I was intending to go further into the account, and narrate all
things appertaining to the temple at Athens called the Eleusinium, a
vision in the night checked me: but what it is lawful for me to write
for everybody, to this I will turn. In front of this temple, where
is also a statue of Triptolemus, there is a brazen bull being led to
sacrifice, and Epimenides the Gnossian is pourtrayed in a sitting
posture, who is recorded to have gone into a field and entered into a
cave and slept there, and woke not from that sleep till forty years
had rolled by, and afterwards wrote epic poems and visited Athens and
other cities. And Thales, who stopped the plague at Lacedæmon, was no
relation of his, nor of the same city as Epimenides: for the latter was
a Gnossian, whereas Thales is declared to have been a Gortynian by the
Colyphonian Polymnastus, who wrote a poem on him for the Lacedæmonians.
And a little further is the temple of Euclea, (_Fair Fame_), a votive
offering for the victory over the Persians at Marathon. And I think the
Athenians prided themselves not a little on this victory: Æschylus,
at any rate, on his death-bed, remembered none of his other exploits,
though he was so remarkable as a Dramatist and had fought both at
Artemisium and Salamis: and he wrote in the Poem he then composed his
own name and the name of his city, and that he had as witnesses of his
prowess the grove at Marathon and the Persians who landed there.

  And beyond the Ceramicus and the portico called _The Royal Portico_
is a temple of Hephæstus, and that a statue of Athene was placed in
it I was not at all surprised at when I remembered the story about
Erichthonius. But seeing that the statue of Athene had grey eyes, I
found that this was a legend of the Libyans, who record that she was
the daughter of Poseidon and the Tritonian Marsh, and that therefore
her eyes were grey as those of Poseidon. And near is a temple of
Celestial Aphrodite, who was first worshipped by the Assyrians, and
after them by the Paphians of Cyprus, and by the Phœnicians who dwell
at Ascalon in Palestine. And from the Phœnicians the people of Cythera
learned her worship. And among the Athenians her worship was instituted
by Ægeus, thinking that he had no children, (for he had none then), and
that his sisters were unfortunate, owing to the wrath of the Celestial
One. And her statue is still among us of Parian stone, the design of
Phidias. And the Athenians have a township of the Athmoneans, who say
that Porphyrion, who reigned even before Actæus, erected among them a
temple to the Celestial Aphrodite. But the traditions of townships and
the dwellers in cities are widely different.




CHAPTER XV.


And as one goes into the portico, which they call _The Painted
Chamber_ from the paintings, there is a brazen statue of Hermes of the
Market-Place, and a gate near, and by it is a trophy of the Athenians
who overcame Plistarchus in a cavalry engagement, who, being the
brother of Cassander, had brought his cavalry and a foreign force
against them. Now, this portico has first the Athenians drawn up in
battle array, at Œnoe in Argive territory, against the Lacedæmonians:
and it is painted not in the height of the action, nor when the time
had come for the display of reckless valour in the heady fight, but
at the commencement of the engagement, and when they were just coming
to blows. And in the middle of the walls are painted the Athenians
and Theseus fighting with the Amazons. Now these are the only women
as it seems from whom reverses in war did not take away a relish for
danger; for after the capture of Themiscyra by Hercules, and later on
after the destruction of the army which they sent against Athens, they
yet went to Ilium and fought with the Athenians and other Greeks. And
next to the Amazons you may see painted the Greeks at the capture of
Ilium, and the kings gathered together on account of Ajax’s violence to
Cassandra: and the painting has Ajax himself, and Cassandra among the
other captive women. And at the end of the painting are the Greeks that
fought at Marathon, of the Bœotians the Platæans, and all the Attic
contingent are marching against the barbarians. And in this part of
the painting the valour is equal on both sides, but in the middle of
the battle the barbarians are fleeing and pushing one another into the
marsh. And at the end of this painting are the Phœnician ships, and the
Greeks slaying the barbarians who are trying to get on board. Here too
is a painting of the hero Marathon from whom the plain is named, and
Theseus in the guise of putting out to sea, and Athene and Hercules:
for by the people of Marathon first, as they themselves allege, was
Hercules considered a god. And of the combatants there stand out most
plainly in the painting Callimachus, who was chosen by the Athenians
as Polemarch, and Miltiades, one of the generals, and the hero who
was called Echetlus, of whom I shall make mention hereafter. Here
also are fixed up brazen shields, and these have an inscription that
they are from the Scionæans and their allies, and others smeared over
with pitch, that neither time nor rust should hurt them, are said to
have belonged to the Lacedæmonians who were captured in the island of
Sphacteria.




CHAPTER XVI.


And before the portico are brazen statues of Solon, the Athenian
legislator, and a little further Seleucus, to whom came beforehand
clear indications of his future prosperity. For when he started from
Macedonia with Alexander, as he was sacrificing to Zeus at Pella,
the wood laid on the altar moved to the statue of the god of its own
accord, and burst into a blaze without fire. And on the death of
Alexander Seleucus, fearing the arrival of Antigonus at Babylon, fled
to Ptolemy the son of Lagus, but returned some time after to Babylon,
and on his return defeated the army of Antigonus and slew Antigonus
himself, and afterwards captured Demetrius, the son of Antigonus,
who came against him with an army. And as all these things succeeded
with him, and not long after the power of Lysimachus collapsed, he
handed over all his power in Asia Minor to his son Antiochus, and
himself hurried into Macedonia, and took with him an army of Greeks
and barbarians. But Ptolemy the brother of Lysandra, who had fled to
Seleucus from Lysimachus, and who was generally speaking a very bold
and daring fellow and on that account called Lightning, when the army
of Seleucus reached Lysimachia privately slew Seleucus, and, allowing
the other kings to take Seleucus’ money, became king of Macedonia,
until venturing first of all the kings we know to fight against the
Galati, he was killed by the barbarians, and Antigonus the son of
Demetrius recovered the kingdom. And Seleucus, I am persuaded, was
an especially upright king, pious and religious. I infer this partly
because he restored to the Milesians at Branchidæ the brazen Apollo,
that had been carried away to Ecbatana in Persia by Xerxes; and partly
because, when he built Seleucia on the river Tigris and introduced
Babylonians to dwell there, he destroyed neither the wall of Babylon
nor the temple of Bel, but allowed the Chaldæans to dwell in its
vicinity.




CHAPTER XVII.


And the Athenians have in the market-place among other things not
universally notable an altar of _Mercy_, to whom, though most useful
of all the gods to the life of man and its vicissitudes, the Athenians
alone of all the Greeks assign honours. And not only is philanthropy
more regarded among them; but they also exhibit more piety to the gods
than others. For they have also an altar to _Shame_, and _Rumour_, and
_Energy_. And it is clear that those people who have a larger share
of piety than others have also a larger share of good fortune. And in
the gymnasium of the market-place, which is not far off and is called
after Ptolemy because he established it, are Hermæ in stone worth
seeing, and a brazen statue of Ptolemy; and the Libyan Juba is here,
and Chrysippus of Soli. And near the gymnasium is a temple of Theseus,
where are paintings of the Athenians fighting against the Amazons. And
this war has also been represented on the shield of Athene, and on the
base of Olympian Zeus. And in the temple of Theseus is also painted
the fight between the Centaurs and Lapithæ. Theseus is represented as
just having slain a Centaur, but with all the rest in the picture the
fight seems to be on equal terms. But the painting on the third wall is
not clear to those who do not know the story, partly as the painting
has faded from age, partly because Micon has not pourtrayed the whole
story. When Minos took Theseus and the rest of the band of boys to
Crete, he was enamoured of Peribœa, and when Theseus was very opposed
to this, he in his rage among other sarcasms that he hurled against
him said that he was not the son of Poseidon, for if he threw the ring
which he chanced to be wearing into the sea he could not get it again,
Minos is said at once to have thrown the ring into the sea when he had
said this. And they say that Theseus jumped into the sea and came up
with the ring and a golden crown, the gift of Amphitrite. And as to the
death of Theseus many varying accounts have been given. For they say
that he was once bound by Pluto until he was liberated by Hercules.
But the most credible account I have heard is that Theseus having
invaded Thesprotia, intending to carry off the wife of the king of the
country, lost the greater part of his army, and himself and Pirithous
were taken prisoners, (for Pirithous also came on the expedition
marriage-hunting), and confined by the king of Thesprotia at Cichyrus.

  Now among other things worth seeing in Thesprotia are the temple
of Zeus at Dodona, and a beech-tree sacred to the god. And near
Cichyrus there is a marsh called Acherusia and the river Acheron, and
there too flows Cocytus with most unpleasant stream. And I fancy that
Homer, having seen these, ventured to introduce them in his account
of the rivers of Hades, and to borrow his names from these rivers in
Thesprotia. However that may be, Theseus being detained there, the sons
of Tyndarus led an expedition to Aphidna, and captured it, and restored
Menestheus to the kingdom. And Menestheus paid no attention to the sons
of Theseus, who had gone to Eubœa for shelter to Elephenor; but as to
Theseus himself, thinking he would be a dangerous adversary if ever
he returned from Thesprotia, he coaxed the people so that if Theseus
ever returned he would be sent back again. Accordingly Theseus was
sent to Crete to Deucalion, and being carried out of his way by storms
to the island Scyrus, the Scyrians gave him a brilliant reception,
both for the splendour of his race and the renown of his exploits;
and it was owing to this that Lycomedes planned his death. And the
shrine of Theseus at Athens was after the time that the Persians were
at Marathon, for it was Miltiades’ son, Cimon, that drove out the
inhabitants of Scyrus to revenge the hero’s death, and that conveyed
his bones to Athens.




CHAPTER XVIII.


Now the temple of the Dioscuri is ancient; they are designed standing,
and their sons seated on horseback. Here too is a painting by
Polygnotus of the marriage of the daughters of Leucippus, and by Micon
of the Argonauts who sailed with Jason to Colchi: in this painting
Acastus and his horses stand out remarkably well. And above the temple
of the Dioscuri is the grove of Aglaurus, to whom and to her sisters
Erse and Pandrosus they say Athene gave Erichthonius, after putting
him in a chest and forbidding them to pry into the contents. Pandrosus
they say obeyed, but the other two opened the chest, and went mad when
they saw Erichthonius, and threw themselves down the Acropolis at the
very steepest place. It was on that very spot that the Persians landed,
and slew those Athenians who thought they understood the oracle better
than Themistocles, and fortified the Acropolis with wooden palisades.
And next is the Prytaneum, where the laws of Solon are written up,
and where are images of the goddesses Peace and Vesta, and among
other statues one to Autolycus the pancratiast; for Miltiades and
Themistocles have been removed for a Roman and a Thracian! As one goes
thence to the lower parts of the city is the temple of Serapis, whose
worship the Athenians introduced to please Ptolemy. Of the Egyptian
temples to Serapis the most famous is that at Alexandria, but the
oldest is that at Memphis, into which strangers may not enter, nor
even priests except during the ritual in connection with Apis. And not
far from the temple of Serapis is the place where they say Pirithous
and Theseus agreed to go to Lacedæmon, and afterwards to Thesprotia.
And next is a temple erected to Ilithyia, who they say came from the
Hyperborean regions to assist Leto in her travail-throes, and of whom
other nations learnt from the people of Delos, who sacrifice to her and
sing at her altar the Hymn of Olen. But the Cretans consider her to
have been born at Amnisus in Gnossian territory, and to have been the
daughter of Hera. And among the Athenians alone her statues are draped
to the bottom of her feet. Two of her statues the women said were
Cretan and votive offerings of Phædra, while the oldest was brought by
Erysichthon from Delos.

  And before going into the temple of Olympian Zeus--which Adrian the
Roman Emperor built, and in which he placed that remarkable statue of
Olympian Zeus (larger than any works of art except the Colossuses at
Rhodes and Rome); it is in ivory and gold, and elegant if you consider
the size--are two statues of Adrian in Thasian stone, and two in
Egyptian stone: and brazen statues in front of the pillars of what the
Athenians call their colonial cities. The whole circuit of the temple
is about four stades, and is full of statues; for from each city is
a statue of the Emperor Adrian, and the Athenians outdid them by the
very fine colossal statue of the Emperor which they erected at the
back of the temple. And in the temple precincts is an ancient statue
of Zeus in brass and a shrine of Cronos and Rhea, and a grove to Earth
by the title of Olympian. Here there is about a cubit’s subsidence of
soil, and they say that after Deucalion’s flood the water came in and
escaped there, and they knead every year a cake of barley meal with
honey and throw it into the cavity. And there is on a pillar a statue
of Isocrates, who left behind him 3 notable examples, his industry (for
though he lived to the age of 98 he never left off taking pupils),
his wisdom (for all his life he kept aloof from politics and public
business), and his love of liberty (for after the news of the battle
of Chæronea he pined away and died of voluntary starvation). And there
are some Persians in stone holding up a brazen tripod, both themselves
and the tripod fine works of art. And they say that Deucalion built
the old temple of Olympian Zeus, bringing as evidence that Deucalion
lived at Athens his tomb not far from this very temple. Adrian erected
also at Athens a temple of Hera and Pan-Hellenian Zeus, and a temple
for all the gods in common. But the most remarkable things are 100
pillars wrought in Phrygian stone, and the walls in the porticoes
corresponding. And there is a room here with a roof of gold and
alabaster stone, adorned also with statues and paintings: and books are
stored up in it. And there is a gymnasium called the Adrian gymnasium:
and here too are 100 pillars of stone from Libyan quarries.




CHAPTER XIX.


And next to the temple of Olympian Zeus is a statue of Pythian
Apollo, as also a temple of Delphian Apollo. And they say that, when
this temple was completed except the roof, Theseus came to the city
incognito. And having a long garment down to his feet and his hair
being elegantly plaited, when he came near this temple, those who were
building the roof asked him jeeringly why a maiden ripe for marriage
was wandering about alone. And his only answer was, it is said,
unyoking the oxen from the waggon which stood by, and throwing it in
the air higher than the roof they were building. And with respect to
the place that they call _The Gardens_, and the temple of Aphrodite,
there is no account given by the Athenians, nor in respect to the
statue of Aphrodite which stands next the temple, and is square like
the Hermæ, and the inscription declares that Celestial Aphrodite is
the oldest of those that are called _Fates_. The statue of Aphrodite
in _The Gardens_ is the work of Alcamenes, and is among the few things
at Athens best worth seeing. There is also a temple of Hercules
called Cynosarges: (_i.e._, _of the white dog_); the history of the
white dog may be learnt by those who have read the oracle. And there
are altars to Hercules and Hebe, (the daughter of Zeus), who, they
think, was married to Hercules. There is also an altar of Alcmene and
Iolaus, who was associated with Hercules in most of his Labours. And
the Lyceum gets its name from Lycus the son of Pandion, but is now
as of old considered a temple of Apollo, for Apollo was here called
Lyceus originally. And it is also said that the natives of Termilæ,
where Lycus went when he fled from Ægeus, are called Lycians from the
same Lycus. And behind the Lyceum is the tomb of Nisus who was king of
Megara and slain by Minos, and the Athenians brought his corpse here
and buried it. About this Nisus there is a story that he had purple
hair, and that the oracle said he would die if it was shorn off. And
when the Cretans came into the land, they took all the other cities of
Megaris by storm, but had to blockade Nisæa, into which Nisus had fled
for refuge. And here they say the daughter of Nisus, who was enamoured
of Minos, cut off her father’s locks. This is the story. Now the rivers
of Attica are the Ilissus and the Eridanus that flows into it, having
the same name as the Celtic Eridanus. The Ilissus is the river where
they say Orithyia was playing when carried off by the North Wind, who
married her, and because of his affinity with the Athenians aided them
and destroyed many of the barbarians’ ships. And the Athenians think
the Ilissus sacred to several gods, and there is an altar also on its
banks to the Muses. The place is also shewn where the Peloponnesians
slew Codrus, the son of Melanthus, the king of Athens. After you cross
the Ilissus is a place called Agræ, and a temple of Artemis Agrotera,
(_The Huntress_), for here they say Artemis first hunted on her arrival
from Delos: accordingly her statue has a bow. And what is hardly
credible to hear, but wonderful to see, is a stadium of white marble;
one can easily conjecture its size in the following manner. Above the
Ilissus is a hill, and this stadium extends from the river to the hill
in a crescent-shaped form. It was built by Herodes an Athenian, and
most of the Pentelican quarry was used in its construction.




CHAPTER XX.


Now there is a way from the Prytaneum called _The Tripods_, so called
from some large temples of the gods there and some brazen tripods in
them, which contain many works of art especially worthy of mention. For
there is a Satyr on which Praxiteles is said to have prided himself
very much: and when Phryne once asked which was the finest of his
works, they say that he offered to give it her like a lover, but would
not say which he thought his finest work. A servant of Phryne at this
moment ran up, and said that most of Praxiteles’ works were destroyed
by a sudden fire that had seized the building where they were, but
that they were not all burnt. Praxiteles at once rushed out of doors,
and said he had nothing to show for all his labour, if the flames had
consumed his Satyr and Cupid. Phryne then bade him stay and be of good
cheer, for he had suffered no such loss, but it was only her artifice
to make him confess which were his finest works. She then selected the
Cupid. And in the neighbouring temple is a boy Satyr handing a cup to
Dionysus. And there is a painting by Thymilus of Cupid standing near
Dionysus. But the most ancient temple of Dionysus is at the theatre.
And inside the sacred precincts are two shrines of Dionysus and two
statues of him, one by Eleuthereus, and one by Alcamenes in ivory and
gold. There is a painting also of Dionysus taking Hephæstus to Heaven.
And this is the story the Greeks tell. Hera exposed Hephæstus on his
birth, and he nursing up his grievance against her sent her as a gift a
golden seat with invisible bonds, so that when she sat in it she was a
prisoner, and Hephæstus would not obey any of the gods, and Dionysus,
whose relations with Hephæstus were always good, made him drunk and
took him to Heaven. There are paintings also of Pentheus and Lycurgus
paying the penalty for their insults to Dionysus, and of Ariadne
asleep, Theseus putting out to sea, and Dionysus coming to carry her
off. And there is near the temple of Dionysus and the theatre a work
of art, said to have been designed in imitation of Xerxes’ tent. It
is a copy, for the original one was burnt by Sulla the Roman general
when he took Athens. And this is how the war came about. Mithridates
was king of the barbarians in the neighbourhood of the Euxine Sea.
Now his pretext for fighting against the Romans, and how he crossed
into Asia, and the cities he reduced by war or won over by diplomacy,
let those who wish to know the whole history of Mithridates concern
themselves about all this: I shall merely relate the circumstances
attending the capture of Athens. There was an Athenian called Aristion,
whom Mithridates employed as ambassador to the Greek States: he
persuaded the Athenians to prefer the friendship of Mithridates to
that of the Romans. However he persuaded only the democracy and the
fiercer spirits, for as to the more respectable Athenians they of
their own accord joined the Romans. And in the battle that ensued the
Romans were easily victorious, and pursued Aristion and the fleeing
Athenians to the city, and Archelaus and the barbarians to the Piræus.
Now Archelaus was the general of Mithridates, whom before this the
Magnesians who inhabit Sipylus wounded, as he was ravaging their
territory, and killed many of the barbarians. So Athens was blockaded,
and Taxilus another general of Mithridates happened to be investing
Elatea in the Phocian district, but when tidings of this came to him he
withdrew his forces into Attica. And the Roman general learning this
left part of his army to continue the siege of Athens, but himself went
with the greater part of his force to encounter Taxilus in Bœotia. And
the third day after news came to both the Roman camps, to Sulla that
the walls at Athens had been carried, and to the force besieging Athens
that Taxilus had been defeated at Chæronea. And when Sulla returned
to Attica, he shut up in the Ceramicus all his Athenian adversaries,
and ordered them to be decimated by lot. And Sulla’s rage against the
Athenians not a whit relaxing, some of them secretly went to Delphi:
and when they enquired if it was absolutely fated that Athens should be
destroyed, the Pythian priestess gave them an oracular response about
the bladder.[4] And Sulla after this had the same complaint with which
I learn Pherecydes the Syrian was visited. And the conduct of Sulla
to most of the Athenians was more savage than one would have expected
from a Roman: but I do not consider this the cause of his malady, but
the wrath of Zeus the God of Suppliants, because when Aristion fled for
refuge to the temple of Athene he tore him away and put him to death.
Athens being thus injured by the war with the Romans flourished again
when Adrian was Emperor.




CHAPTER XXI.


Now the Athenians have statues in the theatre of their tragic and
comic dramatists, mostly mediocrities, for except Menander there is no
Comedian of first-rate powers, and Euripides and Sophocles are the
great lights of Tragedy. And the story goes that after the death of
Sophocles the Lacedæmonians made an incursion into Attica, and their
leader saw in a dream Dionysus standing by him, and bidding him honour
the new Siren with all the honours paid to the dead: and the dream
seemed manifestly to refer to Sophocles and his plays. And even now
the Athenians are wont to compare the persuasiveness of his poetry and
discourses to a Siren’s song. And the statue of Æschylus was I think
completed long after his death, and subsequently to the painting which
exhibits the action at Marathon. And Æschylus used to tell the story
that when he was quite a lad, he slept in a field watching the grapes,
and Dionysus appeared to him and bade him write tragedy: and when
it was day, he wished to obey the god, and found it most easy work.
This was his own account. And on the South Wall, which looks from the
Acropolis to the theatre, is the golden head of Medusa the Gorgon,
with her ægis. And at the top of the theatre there is a crevice in
the rocks up to the Acropolis: and there is a tripod also here. On it
are pourtrayed Apollo and Artemis carrying off the sons of Niobe. I
myself saw this Niobe when I ascended the mountain Sipylus: the rock
and ravine at near view convey neither the idea of a woman, nor a woman
mourning, but at a distance you may fancy to yourself that you see a
woman all tears and with dejected mien.

  As you go from the theatre to the Acropolis is the tomb of Calus.
This Calus, his sister’s son and art-pupil, Dædalus murdered and fled
to Crete: and afterwards escaped into Sicily to Cocalus. And the temple
of Æsculapius, in regard to the statues of the god and his sons and
also the paintings, is well worth seeing. And there is in it a spring,
in which they say Halirrhothius the son of Poseidon was drowned by
Ares for having seduced his daughter, and this was the first case of
trial for murder. Here too among other things is a Sarmatic coat of
mail: anyone looking at it will say that the Sarmatians come not a whit
behind the Greeks in the arts. For they have neither iron that they
can dig nor do they import it, for they have less idea of barter than
any of the barbarians in those parts. This deficiency they meet by the
following invention. On their spears they have bone points instead
of iron, and bows and arrows of cornel wood, and bone points to their
arrows: and they throw lassoes at the enemy they meet in battle, and
gallop away and upset them when they are entangled in these lassoes.
And they make their coats of mail in the following manner. Everyone
rears a great many mares, being as they are a nomadic tribe, the land
not being divided into private allotments, and indeed growing nothing
but forest timber. These mares they use not only for war, and sacrifice
to the gods of the country, but also for food. And after getting
together a collection of hoofs they clean them and cut them in two, and
make of them something like dragons’ scales. And whoever has not seen
a dragon has at any rate seen a pine nut still green: anyone therefore
comparing the state of the hoof to the incisions apparent on pine nuts
would get a good idea of what I mean. These they perforate, and having
sewn them together with ligaments of horses and oxen make them into
coats of mail no less handsome and strong than Greek coats of mail: for
indeed whether they are struck point-blank or shot at they are proof.
But linen coats of mail are not equally useful for combatants, for they
admit the keen thrust of steel, but are some protection to hunters, for
the teeth of lions and panthers break off against them. And you may see
linen coats of mail hung up in other temples and in the Gryneum, where
is a most beautiful grove of Apollo, where the trees both cultivated
and wild please equally both nose and eye.




CHAPTER XXII.


Next to the temple of Æsculapius as you go to the Acropolis is the
temple of Themis. And before it is the sepulchre of Hippolytus. His
death they say came to him in consequence of the curses of his father.
But the story of the guilty love of Phædra, and the bold forwardness
of her nurse, is well known even to any barbarians who know Greek.
There is also a tomb of Hippolytus among the Træzenians, and their
legend is as follows. When Theseus intended to marry Phædra, not
wishing if he had children by her that Hippolytus should either be
their subject or king, he sent him to Pittheus, to be brought up at
Træzen and to be king there. And some time after Pallas and his sons
revolted against Theseus, and he having slain them went to Træzen to
be purified of the murder, and there Phædra first saw Hippolytus, and
became desperately enamoured of him, and (being unsuccessful in her
suit) contrived his death. And the people of Træzen have a myrtle whose
leaves are perforated throughout, and they say it did not grow like
that originally, but was the work of Phædra which she performed in her
love-sickness with her hairpin. And Theseus established the worship
of the Pandemian Aphrodite and of Persuasion, when he combined the
Athenians into one city from several townships. Their old statues did
not exist in my time: but those in my time were by no mean artists.
There is also a temple to Earth, the Rearer of Children, and to
Demeter as Chloe. The meaning of these names may be learnt from the
priests by enquirers. To the Acropolis there is only one approach: it
allows of no other, being everywhere precipitous and walled off. The
vestibules have a roof of white marble, and even now are remarkable
both for their beauty and size. As to the statues of the horsemen I
cannot say with precision, whether they are the sons of Xenophon, or
merely put there for decoration. On the right of the vestibules is
the shrine of Wingless Victory. From it the sea is visible, and there
Ægeus drowned himself as they say. For the ship which took his sons
to Crete had black sails, but Theseus told his father, (for he knew
there was some peril in attacking the Minotaur), that he would have
white sails, if he should sail back a conqueror. But he forgot this
promise in his loss of Ariadne. And Ægeus seeing the ship with black
sails, thinking his son was dead, threw himself in and was drowned.
And the Athenians have a hero-chapel to his memory. And on the left
of the vestibules is a building with paintings: and among those that
time has not destroyed are Diomede and Odysseus, the one taking away
Philoctetes’ bow in Lemnos, the other taking the Palladium from Ilium.
Among other paintings here is Ægisthus being slain by Orestes, and
Pylades slaying the sons of Nauplius that came to Ægisthus’ aid. And
Polyxena about to have her throat cut near the tomb of Achilles. Homer
did well not to mention this savage act. He also appears to me to have
done well, in his account of the capture of Scyrus by Achilles, to have
said not a word about what others relate, of Achilles having lived
at Scyrus among the maidens, which Polygnotus has painted; who has
also painted Odysseus suddenly making his appearance as Nausicaa and
her maids were bathing in the river, just as Homer has described it.
And among other paintings is Alcibiades, and there are traces in the
painting of the victory of his horses at Nemea. There too is Perseus
sailing to Seriphus, carrying to Polydectes the head of Medusa. But I
am not willing to tell the story of Medusa under ‘Attica.’ And, among
other paintings, to pass over the lad carrying the waterpots, and the
wrestler painted by Timænetus, is one of Musæus. I have read verses in
which it is recorded that Musæus could fly as a gift of Boreas, but
it seems to me that Onomacritus wrote the lines, and there is nothing
certainly of Musæus’ composition except the Hymn to Demeter written
for the Lycomidæ. And at the entrance to the Acropolis is a Hermes,
whom they call Propylæus, and the Graces, which they say were the
work of Socrates the son of Sophroniscus, whom the Pythian priestess
testified to have been the wisest of men, a thing which was not said to
Anacharsis, though he went to Delphi on purpose.




CHAPTER XXIII.


Now the Greeks among other things say that they had the seven wise
men. And among these they include the Lesbian tyrant and Periander the
son of Cypselus: and yet Pisistratus and his son Hippias were far more
humane and wise than Periander, both in war and in all that appertained
to citizen life, until Hippias because of the death of Hipparchus acted
with great cruelty, especially to a woman called Leæna, (_Lioness_).
For after the death of Hipparchus, (I speak now of what has never
before been recorded in history, but yet is generally believed by
the Athenians), Hippias tortured her to death, knowing that she had
been Aristogiton’s mistress, and thinking that she could not have been
ignorant of the plot against Hipparchus. In return for this, when
the Pisistratidæ had been deposed from the kingdom, a brazen lioness
was erected by the Athenians to her memory, and near her a statue of
Aphrodite, which they say was a votive offering of Callias, designed by
Calamis.

  And next is a brazen statue of Diitrephes pierced with arrows. This
Diitrephes, among other things which the Athenians record, led back the
Thracian mercenaries who came too late, for Demosthenes had already
sailed for Syracuse. And when he got to the Euripus near Chalcis,
and opposite Mycalessus in Bœotia, he landed and took Mycalessus:
and the Thracians slew not only the fighting men, but also the women
and children. And this proves what I say, that all the cities of the
Bœotians, whom the Thebans had dispossessed, were inhabited in my time
by those who had fled at their capture. Therefore if the barbarians
had not landed and slain all the Mycalessians, those that were left
would afterwards have repeopled the city. A very wonderful fact about
this statue of Diitrephes is that it was pierced with arrows, seeing
that it was not customary for any Greeks but the Cretans to shoot with
the bow. For we know that the Opuntian Locrians were so armed as early
as the Persian war, for Homer described them as coming to Ilium with
bows and slings. But the use of bows did not long remain even with
the Malienses: and I think that they did not use them before the days
of Philoctetes, and soon afterwards ceased to use them. And next to
Diitrephes, (I shall not mention the more obscure images), are some
statues of goddesses, as Hygiea, (_Health_), who they say was the
daughter of Æsculapius, and Athene by the same name of Hygiea. And
there is a small stone such as a little man can sit on, on which they
say Silenus rested, when Dionysus came to the land. Silenus is the name
they give to all old Satyrs. About the Satyrs I have conversed with
many, wishing to know all about them. And Euphemus a Carian told me
that sailing once on a time to Italy he was driven out of his course
by the winds, and carried to a distant sea, where people no longer
sail. And he said that here were many desert islands, some inhabited
by wild men: and at these islands the sailors did not like to land, as
they had landed there before and had experience of the natives, but
they were obliged on that occasion. These islands he said were called
by the sailors Satyr-islands, the dwellers in them were red-haired,
and had tails at their loins not much smaller than horses. When they
perceived the sailors they ran down to the ship, spoke not a word, but
began to handle the women on board. At last the sailors in dire alarm
landed a barbarian woman on the island: and the Satyrs treated her in
such a way as we will not venture to describe.

  I noticed other statues in the Acropolis, as the boy in brass with
a laver in his hand by Lycius the son of Myron, and Perseus having
slain Medusa by Myron. And there is a temple of Brauronian Artemis,
the statue the design of Praxiteles, but the goddess gets her name
from Brauron. And the ancient statue is at Brauron, called Tauric
Artemis. And a brazen model of the Wooden Horse is here, and that this
construction of Epeus was a design to break down the walls, every
one knows who does not consider the Phrygians plainly fatuous. And
tradition says of that Horse that it had inside it the bravest of the
Greeks, and this model in brass corresponds in every particular, and
Menestheus and Teucer are peeping out of it, as well as the sons of
Theseus. And of the statues next the Horse, Critias executed that of
Epicharinus training to run in heavy armour. And Œnobius did a kindness
to Thucydides the son of Olorus. For he passed a decree that Thucydides
should be recalled from exile to Athens, and as he was treacherously
murdered on his return, he has a tomb not far from the Melitian gates.
As to Hermolycus the Pancratiast, and Phormio the son of Asopichus,
as others have written about them I pass them by: only I have this
little bit more to say about Phormio. He being one of the noblest of
the Athenians, and illustrious from the renown of his ancestors, was
heavily in debt. He went therefore to the Pæanian township, and had
his maintenance there until the Athenians chose him as Admiral. He
however declined on the score that he owed money, and that he would
have no influence with the sailors till he had paid it. Accordingly the
Athenians paid his debts, for they would have him as Admiral.




CHAPTER XXIV.


Here too is Athene pourtrayed striking Marsyas the Silenus, because he
would take up her flutes, when the goddess wished them thrown away.
Besides those which I have mentioned is the legendary fight between
Theseus and the Minotaur, a man or a beast according to different
accounts. Certainly many more wonderful monsters than this have been
born of woman even in our times. Here too is Phrixus the son of
Athamas, who was carried to Colchi by the ram. He has just sacrificed
the ram to some god, (if one might conjecture to the god who is called
Laphystius among the Orchomenians), and having cut off the thighs
according to the Greek custom, he is looking at them burning on the
altar. And next, among other statues, is one of Hercules throttling
snakes according to the tradition. And there is Athene springing out
of the head of Zeus. And there also is a bull, the votive offering of
the council of the Areopagus. Why they offered it is not known, but
one might make many guesses if one liked. I have said before that the
Athenians more than any other Greeks have a zeal for religion. For they
first called Athene the worker, they first worshipped the mutilated
Hermæ, and in their temple along with these they have a God of the
Zealous. And whoever prefers modern works of real art to the antique,
may look at the following. There is a man with a helmet on, the work
of Cleœtas, and his nails are modelled in silver. Here is also a
statue of Earth supplicating to Zeus for rain, either wanting showers
for the Athenians, or a drought impending on all Greece. Here too is
Timotheus, the son of Conon, and Conon himself. Here too are cruel
Procne and her son Itys, by Alcamenes. Here too is Athene represented
showing the olive tree, and Poseidon showing water. And there is a
statue by Leochares of Zeus the Guardian of the city, in recording
whose customary rites I do not record the reasons assigned for them.
They put barley on the altar of this Zeus Guardian of the city, and do
not watch it: and the ox kept and fattened up for the sacrifice eats
the corn when it approaches the altar. And they call one of the priests
Ox-killer, and he after throwing the axe at the ox runs away, for that
is the usage: and (as if they did not know who had done the deed) they
bring the axe into court as defendant. They perform the rites in the
way indicated.

  And as regards the temple which they call the Parthenon, as you
enter it everything pourtrayed on the gables relates to the birth of
Athene, and behind is depicted the contest between Poseidon and Athene
for the soil of Attica. And this work of art is in ivory and gold. In
the middle of her helmet is an image of the Sphinx--about whom I shall
give an account when I come to Bœotia--and on each side of the helmet
are griffins worked. These griffins, says Aristæus the Proconnesian in
his poems, fought with the Arimaspians beyond the Issedones for the
gold of the soil which the griffins guarded. And the Arimaspians were
all one-eyed men from their birth, and the griffins were beasts like
lions, with wings and mouth like an eagle. Let so much suffice for
these griffins. But the statue of Athene is full length, with a tunic
reaching to her feet, and on her breast is the head of Medusa worked
in ivory, and in one hand she has a Victory four cubits high, in the
other hand a spear, and at her feet a shield, and near the spear a
dragon which perhaps is Erichthonius. And on the base of the statue is
a representation of the birth of Pandora, the first woman according to
Hesiod and other poets, for before her there was no race of women. Here
too I remember to have seen the only statue here of the Emperor Adrian,
and at the entrance one of Iphicrates the celebrated Athenian general.

  And outside the temple is a brazen Apollo said to be by Phidias: and
they call it Apollo _Averter of Locusts_, because when the locusts
destroyed the land the god said he would drive them out of the country.
And they know that he did so, but they don’t say how. I myself know
of locusts having been thrice destroyed on Mount Sipylus, but not in
the same way, for some were driven away by a violent wind that fell on
them, and others by a strong blight that came on them after showers,
and others were frozen to death by a sudden frost. All this came under
my own notice.




CHAPTER XXV.


There are also in the Acropolis at Athens statues of Pericles the
son of Xanthippus and Xanthippus himself, who fought against the
Persians at Mycale. The statue of Pericles stands by itself, but
near that of Xanthippus is Anacreon of Teos, the first after Lesbian
Sappho who wrote erotic poetry mainly: his appearance is that of a
man singing in liquor. And near are statues by Dinomenes of Io the
daughter of Inachus, and Callisto the daughter of Lycaon, both of
whom had precisely similar fates, the love of Zeus and the hatred of
Hera, Io being changed into a cow, and Callisto into a she-bear. And
on the southern wall Attalus has pourtrayed the legendary battle of
the giants, who formerly inhabited Thrace and the isthmus of Pallene,
and the contest between the Amazons and the Athenians, and the action
at Marathon against the Persians, and the slaughter of the Galati in
Mysia, each painting two cubits in size. There too is Olympiodorus,
illustrious for the greatness of his exploits, notably at that period
when he infused spirit in men who had been continually baffled, and on
that account had not a single hope for the future. For the disaster at
Chæronea was a beginning of sorrows for all the Greeks, and made slaves
alike of those who were absent from it, and of those who fought at it
against the Macedonians. Most of the Greek cities Philip captured,
and though he made a treaty with the Athenians nominally, he really
hurt them most, robbing them of their islands, and putting down their
naval supremacy. And for some time they were quiet, during the reign
of Philip and afterwards of Alexander, but when Alexander was dead and
the Macedonians chose Aridæus as his successor, though the whole power
fell to Antipater, then the Athenians thought it no longer endurable
that Greece should be for all time under Macedonia, but themselves
took up arms and urged others to do the same. And the cities of the
Peloponnesians which joined them were Argos, Epidaurus, Sicyon, Trœzen,
Elis, Phlius, Messene, and outside the Peloponnese the Locrians, the
Phocians, the Thessalians, the Carystians, and those Acarnanians
who ranked with the Ætolians. But the Bœotians who inhabited the
Theban territory which had been stripped of Thebans, fearing that the
Athenians would eject them from Thebes, not only refused to join the
confederate cities but did all they could to further the interests of
the Macedonians. Now the confederate cities were led each by their own
general, but the Athenian Leosthenes was chosen generalissimo, partly
from his city’s renown, partly from his own reputation for experience
in war. He had besides done good service to all the Greeks. For when
Alexander wished to settle in Persia all of those who had served for
pay with Darius and the satraps, Leosthenes was beforehand with him
and conveyed them back to Europe in his ships. And now too, after
having displayed more brilliant exploits than they expected, he infused
dejection in all men by his death, and that was the chief reason of
their failure. For a Macedonian garrison occupied first Munychia,
and afterwards the Piræus and the long walls. And after the death of
Antipater Olympias crossed over from Epirus and ruled for some time,
after putting Aridæus to death, but not long after she was besieged
by Cassander, and betrayed by the multitude. And when Cassander was
king, (I shall only concern myself with Athenian matters), he captured
Fort Panactus in Attica and Salamis, and got Demetrius the son of
Phanostratus, (who had his father’s repute for wisdom), appointed king
over the Athenians. He was however, deposed by Demetrius the son of
Antigonus, a young man well disposed to the Greeks: but Cassander, (who
had a deadly hatred against the Athenians), won over Lachares, who
had up to this time been the leader of the democracy, and persuaded
him to plot to be king: and of all the kings we know of he was most
savage to men and most reckless to the gods. But Demetrius the son
of Antigonus, though he had not been on the best of terms with the
Athenian democracy, yet was successful in putting down the power of
Lachares. And when the town was taken Lachares fled into Bœotia. But as
he had taken the golden shields from the Acropolis, and had stripped
the statue of Athene of all the ornaments that were removable, he was
supposed to be very rich, and was killed for his money’s sake by the
people of Corone. And Demetrius the son of Antigonus, having freed
the Athenians from the yoke of Lachares, did not immediately after
the flight of Lachares give up to them the Piræus, but after being
victorious in war with them put a garrison in the town, and fortified
what is called the Museum. Now the Museum is within the old town walls,
on a hill opposite the Acropolis, where they say that Musæus sang, and
died of old age, and was buried. And on the same place afterwards a
tomb was erected to a Syrian. This hill Demetrius fortified.




CHAPTER XXVI.


Some time after a few remembered the fame of their ancestors, and
when they considered what a change had come over the glory of Athens,
they elected Olympiodorus as their general. And he led against the
Macedonians old men and lads alike, hoping that by zeal rather than
strength their fortunes in war would be retrieved. And when the
Macedonians came out against him he conquered them in battle, and when
they fled to the Museum he took it. So Athens was delivered from the
Macedonians. And of the Athenians that distinguished themselves so as
to deserve special mention, Leocritus the son of Protarchus is said to
have displayed most bravery in action. For he was the first to scale
the wall and leap into the Museum: and as he fell in the fight, among
other honours conferred on him by the Athenians, they dedicated his
shield to Zeus Eleutherius, writing on it his name and his valour. And
this is the greatest feat of Olympiodorus, though he also recovered
the Piræus and Munychia: and when the Macedonians invaded Eleusis he
collected a band of Eleusinians and defeated them. And before this,
when Cassander intended to make a raid into Attica, he sailed to Ætolia
and persuaded the Ætolians to give their help, and this alliance was
the chief reason why they escaped war with Cassander. And Olympiodorus
has honours at Athens in the Acropolis and Prytaneum, and a painting
at Eleusis. And the Phocians who dwell at Elatea have erected a brazen
statue to him at Delphi, because he also helped them when they revolted
from Cassander.

  And next the statue of Olympiodorus is a brazen image of Artemis
called Leucophryene, and it was erected to her by the sons of
Themistocles: for the Magnesians, over whom Themistocles ruled, having
received that post from the king, worship Artemis Leucophryene. But I
must get on with my subject, as I have all Greece to deal with. Endœus
was an Athenian by race, and the pupil of Dædalus, and accompanied
Dædalus to Crete, when he fled there on account of his murder of Calus.
The statue of Athene sitting is by him, with the inscription that
Callias dedicated it and Endœus designed it.

  There is also a building called the Erechtheum: and in the vestibule
is an altar of Supreme Zeus, where they offer no living sacrifice,
but cakes without the usual libation of wine. And as you enter there
are three altars, one to Poseidon, (on which they also sacrifice to
Erechtheus according to the oracle,) one to the hero Butes, and the
third to Hephæstus. And on the walls are paintings of the family of
Butes. The building is a double one, and inside there is sea water in
a well. And this is no great marvel, for even those who live in inland
parts have such wells, as notably the Aphrodisienses in Caria. But this
well is represented as having a roar as of the sea when the South wind
blows. And in the rock is the figure of a trident. And this is said to
have been Poseidon’s proof in regard to the territory Athene disputed
with him.

  Sacred to Athene is all the rest of Athens, and similarly all Attica:
for although they worship different gods in different townships, none
the less do they honour Athene generally. And the most sacred of all
is the statue of Athene in what is now called the Acropolis, but was
then called the Polis (_city_), which was universally worshipped many
years before the various townships formed one city: and the rumour
about it is that it fell from heaven. As to this I shall not give an
opinion, whether it was so or not. And Callimachus made a golden lamp
for the goddess. And when they fill this lamp with oil it lasts for a
whole year, although it burns continually night and day. And the wick
is of a particular kind of cotton flax, the only kind imperishable by
fire. And above the lamp is a palmtree of brass reaching to the roof
and carrying off the smoke. And Callimachus the maker of this lamp,
although he comes behind the first artificers, yet was remarkable for
ingenuity, and was the first who perforated stone, and got the name of
_Art-critic_, whether his own appellation or given him by others.




CHAPTER XXVII.


In the temple of Athene Polias is a Hermes of wood, (said to be a
votive offering of Cecrops,) almost hidden by myrtle leaves. And of
the antique votive offerings worthy of record, is a folding chair
the work of Dædalus, and spoils taken from the Persians, as a coat
of mail of Masistius, who commanded the cavalry at Platæa, and a
scimetar said to have belonged to Mardonius. Masistius we know was
killed by the Athenian cavalry: but as Mardonius fought against the
Lacedæmonians and was killed by a Spartan, they could not have got
it at first hand, nor is it likely that the Lacedæmonians would have
allowed the Athenians to carry off such a trophy. And about the olive
they have nothing else to tell but that the goddess used it as a proof
of her right to the country when it was contested by Poseidon. And
they record also that this olive was burnt when the Persians set fire
to Athens, but though burnt it grew the same day two cubits. And next
to the temple of Athene is the temple of Pandrosus; who was the only
one of the three sisters who didn’t peep into the forbidden chest.
Now the things I most marvelled at are not universally known. I will
therefore write of them as they occur to me. Two maidens live not far
from the temple of Athene Polias, and the Athenians call them the
_carriers of the holy things_: for a certain time they live with the
goddess, but when her festival comes they act in the following way by
night. Putting upon their heads what the priestess of Athene gives them
to carry, (neither she nor they know what these things are,) these
maidens descend, by a natural underground passage, from an enclosure
in the city sacred to Aphrodite of the Gardens. In the sanctuary below
they deposit what they carry, and bring back something else closely
wrapped up. And these maidens they henceforth dismiss, and other two
they elect instead of them for the Acropolis. And near the temple of
Athene is an old woman, about a cubit in size, well-modelled, with an
inscription saying that she is the handmaid Lysimache, and there are
large brazen statues of two men standing apart as for a fight: the one
they call Erechtheus and the other Eumolpus. And yet all that know
Athenian Antiquities are aware that it was Eumolpus’ son, Immaradus,
that was slain by Erechtheus. And at the base are statues of Tolmides’
prophet, and Tolmides himself, who was the Athenian Admiral, and did
great damage especially to the maritime region of the Peloponnesians,
and burnt the dockyards of the Lacedæmonians at Gythium, and took Bœæ
in the neighbouring country, and the island of Cytherus, and made a
descent on Sicyonia, and, when the Sicyonians fought against him as
he was ravaging their land, routed them and pursued them up to the
city. And afterwards when he returned to Athens, he conducted colonies
of the Athenians to Eubœa and Naxos, and attacked the Bœotians with
a land force: and, having laid waste most of the country, and taken
Chæronea after a siege, when he got to Haliartia was himself killed in
battle and his whole army defeated. Such I learnt were the fortunes
of Tolmides. And there are old statues of Athene: they are entire but
rather grimy, and too weak to bear a knock, for fire passed upon them
when Xerxes found the city bare of fighting men, as they had all gone
to man the fleet. There is also a representation of a boar-hunt, (about
which I know nothing for certain unless it is the Calydonian boar,) and
of the fight between Cycnus and Hercules. This Cycnus they say killed
among others the Thracian Lycus in a prize fight: but was himself
slain by Hercules near the river Peneus.

  Of the legends that they tell at Trœzen about Theseus one is that
Hercules, visiting Pittheus at Trœzen, threw down during dinner his
lion’s skin, and that several Trœzenian lads came into the room with
Theseus, who was seven years of age at most. They say that all the
other boys when they saw the lion’s skin fled helter skelter, but
Theseus not being afraid kept his ground, and plucked an axe from one
of the servants, and began to attack it fiercely, thinking the skin
was a live lion. This is the first Trœzenian legend about him. And
the next is that Ægeus put his boots and sword under a stone as means
of identifying his son, and then sailed away to Athens, and Theseus
when he was eighteen lifted the stone and removed what Ægeus had left
there. And this legend is worked in bronze, all but the stone, in the
Acropolis. They have also delineated another exploit of Theseus. This
is the legend. A bull was ravaging the Cretan territory both elsewhere
and by the river Tethris. In ancient times it appears wild beasts
were more formidable to men, as the Nemean and Parnasian lions, and
dragons in many parts of Greece, and boars at Calydon and Erymanthus
and Crommyon in Corinth, of whom it was said that some sprang out of
the ground, and others were sacred to the gods, and others sent for
the punishment of human beings. And this bull the Cretans say Poseidon
sent into their land, because Minos, who was master of the Grecian sea,
held Poseidon in no greater honour than any other god. And they say
that this bull crossed over from Crete to the Peloponnese, and that one
of the twelve Labours of Hercules was to fetch it to Eurystheus. And
when it was afterwards let go on the Argive plain, it fled through the
Isthmus of Corinth, and into Attica to the township of Marathon, and
killed several people whom it met, and among them Androgeos the son
of Minos. And Minos sailed to Athens, (for he could not be persuaded
that the Athenians had had no hand in the death of Androgeos,) and did
great damage, until it was covenanted to send annually seven maidens
and seven boys to Crete to the Minotaur, who was fabled to live in the
Labyrinth at Gnossus. As to the bull that had got to Marathon, it is
said to have been driven by Theseus into the Acropolis, and sacrificed
to Athene. And the township of Marathon has a representation of it.




CHAPTER XXVIII.


Why they erected a brazen statue to Cylon, although he plotted for the
sovereignty, I cannot clearly tell. But I conjecture the reason was
that he was very handsome in person and not unknown to fame, as he
had won the victory at Olympia in the double course, and it was his
good fortune to wed the daughter of Theagenes the king of Megara. And
besides those I have mentioned there are two works of art especially
famous, made out of Athenian spoil, a brazen statue of Athene, the
work of Phidias, made out of spoil taken from the Persians who landed
at Marathon: (the battle of the Lapithæ with the Centaurs, and all the
other things represented on her shield, are said to have been carved by
Mys, but Parrhasius is said to have drawn for Mys the outline of these
and of his other works.) The spearpoint of this Athene, and the plume
of her helmet, are visible from Sunium as you sail in. And there is a
brazen chariot made out of spoil of the Bœotians and Chalcidians in
Eubœa. And there are two other votive offerings, a statue of Pericles
the son of Xanthippus, and, (one of the finest works of Phidias,)
a statue of Athene, called the Lemnian Athene because an offering
from the people of Lemnos. The walls of the Acropolis, (except what
Cimon the son of Miltiades built,) are said to have been drawn out by
Pelasgians who formerly lived under the Acropolis. Their names were
Agrolas and Hyperbius. When I made enquiries who they were, all that I
could learn of them was that they were originally Sicilians, who had
emigrated to Acarnania.

  As you descend, not into the lower part of the city but only below
the Propylæa, there is a well of water, and near it a temple of Apollo
in a cave. Here they think Apollo had an amour with Creusa the daughter
of Erechtheus. And as to Pan, they say that Philippides, (who was sent
as a messenger to Lacedæmon when the Persians landed), reported that
the Lacedæmonians were deferring their march: for it was their custom
not to go out on a campaign till the moon was at its full. But he
said that he had met with Pan near the Parthenian forest, and he had
said that he was friendly to the Athenians, and would come and help
them at Marathon. Pan has been honoured therefore for this message.
Here is also the Areopagus, so called because Ares was first tried
here. I have before stated how and why he slew Halirrhothius. And they
say that subsequently Orestes was tried here for the murder of his
mother. And there is an altar of Athene Area, which Orestes erected
when he escaped punishment. And the two white stones, on which both
defendants and plaintiffs stand in this court, are respectively called
_Rigour-of-the-law_ and _Impudence_.

  And not far off is the temple of the Goddesses whom the Athenians
call _The Venerable Ones_, but Hesiod in his Theogony calls them the
Erinnyes. And Æschylus first represented them with snakes twined in
their hair: but in the statues here, either of these or of any other
infernal gods, there is nothing horrible. Here are statues of Pluto
and Hermes and Earth. Here all that have been acquitted before the
Areopagus offer their sacrifices, besides foreigners and citizens
occasionally. Within the precincts is also the tomb of Œdipus. After
many enquiries I found that his bones had been brought there from
Thebes: for I could not credit Sophocles’ account about the death of
Œdipus, since Homer records that Mecisteus went to Thebes after the
death of Œdipus and was a competitor in the funeral games held in his
honour there.[5]

  The Athenians have other Courts of Law, but not so famous as the
Areopagus. One they call Parabystum and another Trigonum, [that is
_Crush_ and _Triangle_,] the former being in a low part of the city
and crowds of litigants in very trumpery cases frequenting it, the
other gets its name from its shape. And the Courts called _Froggy_ and
_Scarlet_ preserve their names to this day from their colours. But
the largest Court, which has also the greatest number of litigants,
is called Heliæa. Murder-cases are taken in the Court they call
the Palladium, where are also tried cases of manslaughter. And that
Demophon was the first person tried here no one disputes: but why he
was tried is debated. They say that Diomede, sailing home after the
capture of Ilium, put into Phalerum one dark night, and the Argives
landed as on hostile soil, not knowing in the dark that it was Attica.
Thereupon they say Demophon rushed up, being ignorant that the men in
the ships were Argives, and slew several of them, and went off with the
Palladium which he took from them, and an Athenian not recognized in
the melée was knocked down and trodden underfoot by Demophon’s horse.
For this affair Demophon had to stand his trial, prosecuted some say by
the relations of this Athenian, others say by the Argives generally.
And the Delphinium is the Court for those who plead that they have
committed justifiable homicide, which was the plea of Theseus when he
was acquitted for killing Pallas and his sons who rose up against him.
And before the acquittal of Theseus every manslayer had to flee for his
life, or if he stayed to suffer the same death as he had inflicted. And
in the Court called the Prytaneum they try iron and other inanimate
things. I imagine the custom originated when Erechtheus was king of
Athens, for then first did Ox-killer kill an ox at the temple of Zeus
Guardian of the City: and he left the axe there and fled the country,
and the axe was forthwith acquitted after trial, and is tried annually
even nowadays. Other inanimate things are said to have spontaneously
committed justifiable homicide: the best and most famous illustration
of which is afforded by the scimetar of Cambyses.[6] And there is at
the Piræus near the sea a Court called Phreattys: here fugitives, if
(after they have once escaped) a second charge is brought against them,
make their defence on shipboard to their hearers on land. Teucer first
(the story goes) thus made his defence before Telamon that he had had
no hand in the death of Ajax. Let this suffice for these matters, that
all who care may know everything about the Athenian law-courts.




CHAPTER XXIX.


Near the Areopagus is shewn the ship that is made for the procession
at the Panathenæa. And this perhaps has been outdone. But the ship at
Delos is the finest I have ever heard of, having nine banks of rowers
from the decks.

  And the Athenians in the townships, and on the roads outside the
city, have temples of the gods, and tombs of men and heroes. And not
far distant is the Academy, once belonging to a private man, now a
gymnasium. And as you go down to it are the precincts of Artemis, and
statues of her as _Best_ and _Beautifullest_: I suppose these titles
have the same reference as the lines of Sappho, another account about
them I know but shall pass over. And there is a small temple, to
which they carry every year on appointed days the statue of Dionysus
Eleuthereusis. So many temples to the gods are there here. There are
also tombs, first of Thrasybulus the son of Lycus, in all respects one
of the most famous of the Athenians either since his day or before
him. Most of his exploits I shall pass by, but one thing will be
enough to prove my statement. Starting from Thebes with only sixty
men he put down the _Thirty Tyrants_, and persuaded the Athenians who
were in factions to be reconciled to one another and live on friendly
terms. His is the first tomb, and near it are the tombs of Pericles
and Chabrias and Phormio. And all the Athenians have monuments here
that died in battle either on land or sea, except those that fought
at Marathon. For those have tombs on the spot for their valour. But
the others lie on the road to the Academy, and slabs are on their
tombs recording the name and township of each. First come those whom
the Edoni unexpectedly fell upon and slew in Thrace, when they had
made themselves masters of all the country up to Drabescus: and it
is said also that hailstones fell on them. And among generals are
Leagrus, who had the greatest amount of power committed to him, and
Sophanes of Decelea, who slew the Argive Eurybates, (who was helping
the Æginetans), the victor in five contests at Nemea. And this is the
third army the Athenians sent out of Greece. For all the Greeks by
mutual consent fought against Priam and the Trojans: but the Athenians
alone sent an army into Sardinia with Iolaus, and again to Ionia, and
the third time to Thrace. And before the monument is a pillar with
a representation of two cavalry officers fighting, whose names are
Melanopus and Macartatus, who met their death contending against the
Lacedæmonians and Bœotians, at the border of the Eleonian and Tanagræan
territory. And there is the tomb of the Thessalian cavalry who
remembered their ancient friendship to Athens, when the Peloponnesians
under Archidamas first invaded Attica: they are near the Cretan
archers. And again there are tombs of the Athenians, as of Clisthenes,
(who made the regulations for the tribes which are observed even
now,) and the cavalry who were slain on that day of danger, when the
Thessalians brought aid. Here too are the Cleonæi, who came with the
Argives into Attica: why they came I shall tell when I come to Argos.
Here too is the tomb of the Athenians who fought with the Æginetans
before the Persian War. And that was I ween a just decree of the people
that, if the Athenians gave a public burial to the slaves, their names
should be written on a pillar. And this proves that they behaved well
to their masters in the wars. And there are also monuments of other
valiant men, who fell fighting in various places: the most illustrious
of those that fought at Olynthus, and Melesander (who sailed in his
ships up the Mæander in Upper Caria), and those who fell in the war
with Cassander, and those Argives who were formerly the allies of the
Athenians. This alliance came about (they say) in the following manner.
There was an earthquake at Lacedæmon, and the Helots revolted and went
to Ithome: and when they revolted the Lacedæmonians sent for aid to
the Athenians and others: and they despatched to them picked men under
Cimon the son of Miltiades. These the Lacedæmonians sent back moved by
suspicion. And the Athenians thought such an outrage insufferable, and,
on their return home again, made an offensive and defensive alliance
with the Argives, who had always been the enemies of the Lacedæmonians.
And afterwards, when a battle between the Athenians and Bœotians and
Lacedæmonians was on the eve of taking place at Tanagra, the Argives
came to the aid of the Athenians. And when the Argives were having the
better of it, night came on and took away the certainty of victory,
and the next day the Lacedæmonians won the victory, the Thessalians
having betrayed the Athenians. I ought also to mention Apollodorus the
leader of the mercenaries, who was an Athenian, but had been sent by
Arsites, the satrap of Phrygia near the Hellespont, and had relieved
Perinthia, when Philip attacked it with an army. He is buried here,
with Eubulus the son of Spintharus, and other men who although they
deserved it did not meet with good fortune; some fell conspiring
against the tyrant Lachares, and others counselled the seizure of the
Piræus when the Macedonians guarded it, but before they could carry
out their plan they were informed against by their fellow-conspirators
and put to death. Here too are the tombs of those who fell at Corinth:
and it was palpably shewn here (and afterwards at Leuctra) by the
Deity, that those whom the Greeks call brave were nothing without
good fortune, since the Lacedæmonians who had formerly conquered the
Corinthians and Athenians, and moreover the Argives and Bœotians, were
afterwards so completely routed at Leuctra by the Bœotians alone. And
next to the tombs of those that fell at Corinth, some elegiac lines
testify that the pillar was erected not only to them, but also to
those that died at Eubœa and Chios, as also to some whom it declares
were slain in the remote parts of the continent of Asia Minor, and in
Sicily. And all the Generals are inscribed on it except Nicias, and the
Platæan soldiers and citizens together. Nicias was passed over for the
following reason: I give the same account as Philistus, who said that
Demosthenes made conditions of surrender for everybody but himself,
and when he was taken attempted suicide, whereas Nicias surrendered
voluntarily. And so his name was not written on the pillar, as he was
shewn to be a willing captive and not a man fit for war. On another
pillar are the names of those who fought in Thrace, and at Megara,
and when Alcibiades persuaded the Mantinæans and Eleans to revolt
from the Lacedæmonians, and those who conquered the Syracusans before
Demosthenes came to Sicily. Those also are buried here who fought the
naval engagement at the Hellespont, and those who fought against the
Macedonians at Chæronea, and those who served with Cleon at Amphipolis,
and those who fell at Delium in the territory of the Tanagræans, and
those whom Leosthenes led to Thessaly, and those who sailed to Cyprus
with Cimon, and those, thirteen only, who with Olympiodorus drove out
the Macedonian garrison. And the Athenians say that, when the Romans
were fighting against one of their neighbours, they sent a small force
to their aid, and certainly afterwards there were five Attic triremes
present at the sea-fight between the Romans and Carthaginians. These
also have their tomb here. The exploits of Tolmides and his men, and
the manner of their death, I have already described: but let any one
to whom their memory is dear know that they too lie buried on this
road. They too lie here who on the same day won under Cimon a glorious
victory both by land and sea. Here too lie Conon and Timotheus,
father and son, second only to Miltiades and Cimon in their brilliant
feats. Here too lie Zeno the son of Mnaseas, and Chrysippus of Soli,
and Nicias the son of Nicomedes, (the best painter of animals in his
day,) and Harmodius and Aristogiton who murdered Hipparchus the son of
Pisistratus, and the orators Ephialtes, (who did his best to discredit
the legislation of the Areopagus,) and Lycurgus the son of Lycophron.
This Lycurgus put into the public treasury 6,500 talents more than
Pericles the son of Xanthippus got together, and furnished elaborate
apparatus for the processions of Athene, and golden Victories, and
dresses for 100 maidens, and for war arms and darts, and 400 triremes
for naval engagements. And as for buildings he finished the theatre
though others began it, and during his term of office built docks at
the Piræus, and a gymnasium at the Lyceum. All his silver and gold work
Lachares plundered when he was in power: but the buildings remain to
this day.




CHAPTER XXX.


Before the entrance into the Academy is an altar of Eros, with the
inscription that Charmus was the first of the Athenians to offer
votive offerings to Eros. And they say that the altar in the city
called the altar of Anteros is the offering of the resident aliens,
for Meles an Athenian, tired of Timagoras, a resident alien who was
enamoured of him, bade him go to the highest part of the rock and
throw himself down. And Timagoras careless of his life, and wishing
in all things to gratify the stripling’s commands, threw himself down
accordingly. But Meles, when he saw that Timagoras was dead, was so
stricken with remorse, that he threw himself down from the same rock,
and so perished. And in consequence it was ordained that the resident
aliens should worship as a god Anteros, the avenger of Timagoras. And
in the Academy is an altar of Prometheus, and they run from it to the
city with lighted torches. The game is to keep the torch alight as
they run. And if the torch goes out there is no longer victory to the
first, but the second wins instead. And if his is out, then the third.
And so on. And if the torches of all go out, then there is no one who
can win the game. There is also an altar of the Muses, and another of
Hermes, and in the interior one of Athene, and another of Hercules.
And there is an olive-tree, which is said to have been the second that
ever was. And not far from the Academy is the tomb of Plato, to whom
the Deity foretold that he would be most excellent in Philosophy, and
foretold it in the following way. Socrates, the night before Plato was
going to be his pupil, dreamed that a swan flew into his bosom. Now
the swan is a bird that has a fame for music, for they say that Cycnus
[_Swan_], king of the Ligyans across the Eridanus in Celtic territory,
was fond of music, and when he died was at Apollo’s desire changed into
a bird. I daresay a musical man reigned over the Ligyans, but I can
hardly believe that a man became a bird. Here too is seen the tower of
Timon, who was the only person who thought one can be happy in no way
except by shunning one’s kind. There is also shewn here a place called
Colonus, sacred to Poseidon the creator of horses, the first place in
Attica which they say Œdipus came to: this is however different from
the account of Homer, still it is the account they give. There is also
an altar of Poseidon God of Horses and of Athene Goddess of Horses, and
a hero-chapel of Pirithous and Theseus and Œdipus and Adrastus. But
Poseidon’s grove and temple were burnt by Antigonus, when he invaded
Attica and ravaged it with his army.




CHAPTER XXXI.


Now the small townships of Attica, founded by haphazard, have the
following records. The Alimusii have a temple to Law-giving Demeter and
her daughter Proserpine; and in Zoster [_Belt_] by the sea is an altar
to Athene and Apollo and Artemis and Leto. They say that Leto did not
give birth to her children here, but loosed her belt as if she were
going to, and that was why the place got that name. The Prospaltii also
have a temple to Proserpine and Demeter, and the Anagyrasians have a
temple to the Mother of the Gods. And at Cephalæ Castor and Pollux are
held in highest honour: for they call them the Great Gods.

  And the people of Prasiæ have a temple of Apollo: here came (they
say) the firstfruits of the Hyperboreans, handed over by them to the
Arimaspians, and by the Arimaspians to the Issedones, and brought
thence by the Scythians to Sinope, and thence carried by the Greeks to
Prasiæ, and by the Athenians to Delos: these firstfruits are hidden
in an ear of wheat, and may be looked at by nobody. At Prasiæ there
is also a monument to Erysichthon, who died on his passage home, as
he sailed back from Delos after his mission there. That Cranaus the
king of the Athenians was expelled by Amphictyon, though he was his
kinsman, I have before narrated: and they say that when he fled with
his adherents to the Lamprian township he was killed and buried there:
and his tomb is there to this day. And Ion the son of Xuthus, (for he
too dwelt in Attica, and commanded the Athenians in the war against
the Eleusinians,) has a tomb in the place called Potami.

  So far tradition goes. And the Phlyenses have altars to
Dionysus-giving Apollo and Lightgiving Artemis, and to Dionysus
Crowned with flowers, and to the Nymphs of the River Ismenus, and to
Earth whom they call the Great Goddess: and another temple has altars
to Fruitbearing Demeter, and Zeus the Protector of Property, and
Tithronian Athene, and Proserpine the Firstborn, and to the goddesses
called _The Venerable Ones_, (_i.e._ the Eumenides.) And at Myrrhinus
there is a statue to Colænian Artemis. And the Athmonenses worship
Amarynthian Artemis. And when I enquired of the Interpreters and
Experts as to these Goddesses, I could obtain no accurate information,
but I conjecture as follows. Amarynthus is in Eubœa, and there too they
worship the Amarynthian Artemis. And the Athenians at her feast bestow
as much honour on her as the Eubœans. In this way I think she got her
name among the Athmonenses, and Colænian Artemis at Myrrhinus from
Colænus. I have written already elsewhere that it is the opinion of
many in the townships that there were kings at Athens before Cecrops.
Now Colænus is the name of a king who ruled at Athens before Cecrops,
according to the tradition of the people of Myrrhinus. And there is a
township at Acharnæ: the Acharnians worship among other gods Apollo of
the Streets and Hercules. And there is an altar to Athene Hygiea: they
also worship Athene by the name of _Horse-lover_, and Dionysus by that
of _Songster_, and _Ivy-God_, for they say ivy grew here first.




CHAPTER XXXII.


And the mountains of Attica are Pentelicus, famous for its
stonequarries, and Parnes, which affords good hunting of wild boars
and bears, and Hymettus, which is the best place for bees next to the
territory of the Alazones. For among the Alazones the bees are so tame
that they live with the people, and go freely about for their food
anywhere, and are not confined in hives: and they make honey anywhere,
and it is so firm and compact that you cannot separate it from the
comb. And on the mountains of Attica also are statues of the gods.
At Pentelicus there is a statue of Athene, and at Hymettus one of
Zeus of Hymettus: there are altars also to Rainy Zeus, and Apollo the
Fore-seer. And at Parnes there is a brazen statue of Parnesian Zeus,
and an altar to Semalean Zeus. There is also another altar at Parnes,
and they sacrifice on it sometimes to Zeus the Rainy, sometimes to Zeus
the Averter of Ill. There is also the small mountain called Anchesmus,
and on it the statue of Anchesmian Zeus.

  Before I turn to the description of the islands, I will enter
again into the history of the townships. The township of Marathon
is about equidistant from Athens and Carystus in Eubœa. It was this
part of Attica that the Persians landed at, and were defeated, and
lost some of their ships as they were putting out to sea in retreat.
And in the plain is the tomb of the Athenians, and on it are pillars
with the names of the dead according to their tribes. And another
for the Platæans of Bœotia and their slaves: for this was the first
engagement in which slaves fought. And there is apart a monument to
Miltiades the son of Cimon, whose death occurred afterwards, when he
failed to capture Paros, and was on that account put on his trial by
the Athenians. Here every night one may hear horses neighing and men
fighting: those who come on purpose to see the sight suffer for their
curiosity, but if they are there as spectators accidentally the wrath
of the gods harms them not. And the people of Marathon highly honour
those that fell in the battle, calling them heroes, as also they
pay honours to Marathon (from whom the township gets its name), and
Hercules, whom they say they first of all the Greeks worshipped as a
god. And it chanced, as they say, in the battle that a man of rustic
appearance and dress appeared, who slew many of the Persians with a
ploughshare, and vanished after the fight: and when the Athenians made
enquiry of the oracle, the god gave no other answer, but bade them
honour the hero Echetlæus. And a trophy of white stone was erected
there. And the Athenians say that they buried the Persians, (it being
a matter of decency to bury in the ground a man’s corpse,) but I could
find no tomb. For there was no mound nor any other visible trace of
burial. So they must have carried them to some hole and thrown them
in pell mell. And there is at Marathon a fountain called Macaria, and
this is the tradition about it. When Hercules fled from Eurystheus
at Tiryns, he went to his friend Ceyx the king of Trachis. And when
Hercules left mankind Eurystheus asked for his children, and Ceyx sent
them to Athens, pleading his own weakness, and suggesting that Theseus
might be able to protect them. And coming to Athens as suppliants,
they brought about the first war between the Peloponnesians and the
Athenians, as Theseus would not give them up to Eurystheus, though he
begged hard for them. And they say that an oracle told the Athenians
that one of the children of Hercules must voluntarily die, or else they
would not get the victory. Hereupon Macaria, the daughter of Deianira
and Hercules, sacrificed herself that the Athenians might conquer in
the war, and the fountain gets its name from her. And there is at
Marathon a lake for the most part muddy: into it the fugitive Persians
fell not knowing the way, and most of the slaughter happened they say
here. And above the lake are the mangers of the horses of Artaphernes
in stone, and among the rocks vestiges of a tent. And a river flows
from the lake, affording pleasant water to the herds that come to the
lake, but at its outlet into the sea it is salt and full of sea fish.
And at a little distance from the plain is a mountain of Pan, and a
cave well worth seeing. The entrance to it is narrow, but when you get
well in there are rooms and baths, and what is called Pan’s herd of
goats, rocks very like goats in shape.




CHAPTER XXXIII.


And not far from Marathon is Brauron, where they say Iphigenia, the
daughter of Agamemnon, landed in her flight from the Tauri, bringing
with her the statue of Artemis, and, having left it here, went on
to Athens and afterwards to Argos. Here is indeed an ancient statue
of Artemis. But those who have the Tauric statue of the goddess in
my opinion, I shall show in another part of my work. And about
sixty stades from Marathon is Rhamnus, as you go along the shore to
Oropus. And there are buildings near the sea for men, and a little
way from the sea on the cliff is a temple of Nemesis, who is the most
implacable of all the gods to haughty men. And it seems that those
Persians who landed at Marathon met with vengeance from this goddess:
for despising the difficulty of capturing Athens, they brought Parian
marble to make a trophy of, as if they had already conquered. This
marble Phidias made into a statue of Nemesis, and on the goddess’
head is a crown with some figures of stags, and some small statues of
Victory: in one hand she has a branch of an apple tree, in the other
a bowl, on which some Ethiopians are carved. As to these Ethiopians I
could not myself conjecture what they referred to, nor could I accept
the account of those who thought they knew, who say that they were
carved on the bowl because of the river Oceanus: for the Ethiopians
dwelt by it, and Oceanus was Nemesis’ father. For indeed Oceanus is
not a river but a sea, the remotest sea sailed on by men, and on
its shore live the Spaniards and Celts, and in it is the island of
Britain. But the remotest Ethiopians live beyond Syene by the Red Sea,
and are fisheaters, from which circumstance the gulf near which they
live is called Fish-eater. But the most upright ones[7] inhabit the
city Meroe, and what is called the Ethiopian plain: these shew the
Table of the Sun, but have no sea or river except the Nile. And there
are other Ethiopians (who live near the Mauri), that extend to the
territory of the Nasamones. For the Nasamones, whom Herodotus calls
the Atlantes, but geographers call Lixitæ, are the remotest of the
Libyans who live near Mount Atlas. They sow nothing, and live on wild
vines. And neither these Ethiopians nor the Nasamones have any river.
For the water near Mount Atlas, though it flows in three directions,
makes no river, for the sand sucks it all in. So the Ethiopians live
by no river or ocean. And the water from Mount Atlas is muddy, and at
its source there are crocodiles two cubits long, and when men approach
they dive down into the water. And many have the idea that this water
coming up again out of the sand makes the river Nile in Egypt. Now
Mount Atlas is so high that its peaks are said to touch the sky, and
it is inaccessible from the water and trees which are everywhere. The
neighbourhood of the Nasamones has been explored, but we know of no one
who has sailed by the parts near the sea. But let this account suffice.
Neither this statue of Nemesis nor any other of the old statues of
her are delineated with wings, not even the most holy statues at
Smyrna: but in later times people, wishing to shew this goddess as
especially following upon Love, gave Nemesis wings as well as Love. I
shall describe what is at the base of the statue, only clearing up the
following matter. They say Nemesis was the mother of Helen, but Leda
suckled her and brought her up: but her father the Greeks generally
think was Zeus and not Tyndareus. Phidias having heard this represented
on the base of the statue Helen being carried by Leda to Nemesis, and
Tyndareus and his sons, and a man called Hippeus with a horse standing
by. There too are Agamemnon and Menelaus, and Pyrrhus the son of
Achilles, the first husband of Hermione, the daughter of Helen. Orestes
was passed over for the murder of his mother, though Hermione remained
with him all her life and bore him a son. And next come Epochus, and
another young man. I have heard nothing else of them than that they are
the brothers of Œnoe, who gave her name to the township.




CHAPTER XXXIV.


The land about Oropus between Attica and Tanagra, which originally
belonged to Bœotia, is now Athenian. The Athenians fought for it
continually, but got no firm hold of it till Philip gave it them after
the capture of Thebes. The city is near the sea and has played no great
part in history: about 12 stades from it is the temple of Amphiaraus.
And it is said that, when Amphiaraus fled from Thebes, the earth opened
and swallowed up him and his chariot: but it did not they say happen
here but at a place called Harma (_Chariot_), on the way from Thebes to
Chalcis. And the Oropians first made Amphiaraus a god, and since all
the Greeks have so accounted him. I can mention others who were once
men, who have honours paid to them as gods, and cities dedicated to
them, as Eleus in the Chersonese to Protesilaus, and Lebadea in Bœotia
to Trophonius: so Amphiaraus has a temple at Oropus, and a statue in
white stone. And the altar has five divisions: one belongs to Hercules
and Zeus and Pæonian Apollo, and another is dedicated to heroes and
heroes’ wives. And the third belongs to Vesta and Hermes and Amphiaraus
and the sons of Amphilochus: but Alcmæon, owing to the murder of
Eriphyle, has no honour with Amphiaraus, nor with Amphilochus. And
the fourth division of the altar belongs to Aphrodite and Panacea,
and also to Jason and Hygiea and Pæonian Athene. And the fifth has
been set apart for the Nymphs and Pan, and the rivers Achelous and
Cephisus. And Amphilochus has also an altar at Athens, and at Mallus
in Cilicia an oracle most veracious even in my day. And the Oropians
have a fountain near the temple, which they call Amphiaraus’, but they
neither sacrifice at it, nor use it for lustrations or washing their
hands. But when any disease has been cured by means of the oracle, then
it is customary to throw into the fountain some gold or silver coin:
and here they say Amphiaraus became a god. And the Gnossian Iophon,
one of the interpreters of Antiquities, has preserved some oracular
responses of Amphiaraus in Hexameters, given he says to the Argives
who were despatched to Thebes. These lines had irresistible attraction
for the general public. Now besides those who are said of old to have
been inspired by Apollo, there was no oracle-giving seer, but there
were people good at explaining dreams, and inspecting the flights of
birds and the entrails of victims. Amphiaraus was I think especially
excellent in divination by dreams: and it is certain when he became
a god that he instituted divination by dreams. And whoever comes to
consult Amphiaraus has first (such is the custom) to purify himself,
that is to sacrifice to the god. They sacrifice then to all the other
gods whose names are on the altar. And after all these preliminary
rites, they sacrifice a ram, and wrapping themselves up in its skin go
to sleep, and expect divine direction through a dream.




CHAPTER XXXV.


And the Athenians have various islands not far from Attica, one called
after Patroclus, about which I have already given an account, and
another a little beyond Sunium, as you sail leaving Attica on the left:
here they say Helen landed after the capture of Ilium, so the Island
is called Helena. And Salamis lies over against Eleusis and extends
towards Megaris. The name Salamis was they say originally given to
this island from Salamis the mother of Asopus, and afterwards the
Æginetans under Telamon inhabited the island: and Philæus, the son
of Eurysaces and grandson of Ajax, became an Athenian and handed it
over to Athens. And many years afterwards the Athenians expelled the
people of Salamis, condemning them for having been slack of duty in
the war with Cassander, and for having surrendered their city to the
Macedonians more from choice than compulsion: and Ascetades (who had
been chosen as Governor of Salamis) they condemned to death, and swore
that for all time they would remember this treason of the people of
Salamis. And there are yet ruins of the market, and a temple of Ajax,
and his statue in ebony. And divine honours are to this day paid by
the Athenians to Ajax and Eurysaces: the latter has also an altar at
Athens. And a stone is shown at Salamis not far from the harbour: on
which they say Telamon sate and gazed at the vessel in which his sons
were sailing away to Aulis, to join the general expedition of the
Greeks against Ilium. And the natives of Salamis say that after the
death of Ajax a flower first appeared on their island: white and red,
smaller than the lily especially in its petals, with the same letters
on it as the hyacinth.[8] And I have heard the tradition of the Æolians
(who afterwards inhabited Ilium) as to the controversy about the
arms of Achilles, and they say that after the shipwreck of Odysseus
these arms were washed ashore by the sea near the tomb of Ajax. And
some particulars as to his great size were given me by a Mysian. He
told me that the sea washed his tomb which was on the seashore, and
made entrance to it easy, and he bade me conjecture the huge size of
his body by the following detail. His kneepans, (which the doctors
call _mills_,) were the size of the quoits used by any lad practising
for the Pentathlum. I do not wonder at the size of those who are
called Cabares, who, remotest of the Celts, live in a region thinly
peopled from the extreme cold, for their corpses are not a bit bigger
than Egyptian ones. I will now relate some remarkable cases of dead
bodies. Among the Magnesians at Lethæus one of the citizens, called
Protophanes, was victor on the same day at Olympia in the pancratium
and in the wrestling: some robbers broke into his tomb, thinking to
find something valuable there, and after them came others to see his
corpse: his ribs were not separated as is usual, but he was all bone
from his shoulders to the lowest ribs, which are called by the doctors
_false ribs_. And the Milesians have in front of their city the island
Lade, which breaks off into two little islands, one of which is called
Asterius. And they say that Asterius was buried here, and that he
was the son of Anax, and Anax was the son of Earth: his corpse is
two cubits, no less. The following circumstance also appears to me
wonderful. In Upper Lydia there is a small town called the Gates of
Temenus. Some bones were discovered here, when a piece of cliff broke
off in a storm, in shape like those of a man, but on account of their
size no one would have thought them a man’s. And forthwith a rumour
spread among the populace that it was the dead body of Geryon the son
of Chrysaor, and that a man’s seat fashioned in stone on the hillside
was his seat. And they called the mountain torrent Oceanus, and said
that people ploughing often turned up horns of oxen, for the story goes
that Geryon bred most excellent oxen. But when I opposed their theory,
and proved to them that Geryon lived at Gades, and that he has no known
tomb but a tree of various forms, hereupon the Lydian Antiquarians told
the real truth, that it was the dead body of Hyllus, and that Hyllus
was the son of Earth, and gave his name to the river Hyllus. They said
also that Hercules on account of his former intercourse with Omphale
called his son Hyllus after the same river.




CHAPTER XXXVI.


At Salamis, to return to my subject, there is a temple of Artemis, and
a trophy erected for the victory which Themistocles the son of Neocles
won for the Greeks. There is also a temple to Cychreus. For when the
Athenians were fighting the naval engagement with the Persians it is
said that a dragon was seen in the Athenian fleet, and the oracle
informed the Athenians that it was the hero Cychreus. And there is an
island facing Salamis called Psyttalea, on which they say as many as
400 Persians landed: who after the defeat of Xerxes’ fleet were they
say slain by the Greeks who passed over into Psyttalea. There is not
one statue in the island which is a work of art, but there are some
rude images of Pan made anyhow.

  And as you go to Eleusis from Athens, by the way which the Athenians
call the Sacred Way, is the tomb of Anthemocritus, to whom the
Megarians acted most unscrupulously, inasmuch as they killed him though
he came as a herald, to announce to them that henceforth they were not
to cultivate the sacred land. And for this act of theirs the wrath of
the two goddesses[9] still abides, since they are the only Greeks that
the Emperor Adrian was not able to aggrandise. And next to the column
of Anthemocritus is the tomb of Molottus, who was chosen as General of
the Athenians when they crossed over into Eubœa to the aid of Plutarch.
And near this is a village called Scirus for the following reason.
When the people of Eleusis were at war with Erechtheus, a prophet
came from Dodona Scirus by name, who also built at Phalerum the old
temple of Sciradian Athene. And as he fell in battle the Eleusinians
buried him near a mountain torrent, and both the village and torrent
get their name from the hero. And near is the tomb of Cephisodorus,
who was the leader of the people, and especially opposed Philip the
son of Demetrius, the king of the Macedonians. And Cephisodorus got
as allies for the Athenians the Mysian king Attalus, and the Egyptian
king Ptolemy, and independent nations as the Ætolians, and islanders as
the Rhodians and Cretans. And as the succours from Egypt and Mysia and
Crete came for the most part too late, and as the Rhodians (fighting
by sea only) could do little harm to heavy-armed soldiers like the
Macedonians, Cephisodorus sailed for Italy with some of the Athenians,
and begged the Romans to aid them. And they sent them a force and a
general, who so reduced Philip and the Macedonians that eventually
Perseus, the son of Philip, lost his kingdom, and was carried to Italy
as a captive. This Philip was the son of Demetrius: who was the first
of the family who was king of Macedonia, after slaying Alexander the
son of Cassander, as I have before related.




CHAPTER XXXVII.


And next to the tomb of Cephisodorus are buried Heliodorus the
Aliensian, (you may see a painting of him in the large temple of
Athene): and Themistocles the son of Poliarchus, the great grandson of
the Themistocles that fought the great sea-fight against Xerxes and the
Medes. All his other descendants except Acestius I shall pass by. But
she the daughter of Xenocles, the son of Sophocles, the son of Leo,
had the good fortune to have all her ancestors torchbearers even up to
her great grandfather Leo, and in her life she saw first her brother
Sophocles a torchbearer, and after him her husband Themistocles, and
after his death her son Theophrastus. Such was the good fortune she is
said to have had.

  And as you go a little further is the grove of the hero Lacius, who
gives his name to a township. There too is the tomb of Nicocles of
Tarentum, who won the greatest fame of all harpers. There is also an
altar to Zephyrus, and a temple of Demeter and Proserpine: Athene and
Poseidon have joint honours with them. Here they say Phytalus received
Demeter into his house, and the goddess gave him in return a fig tree.
My account is confirmed by the inscription on Phytalus’ tomb.

    “Here Phytalus king-hero once received
    Holy Demeter, when she first vouchsafed
    The fruit that mortals call the fig: since when
    The race of Phytalus has deathless fame.”

  And before crossing over the river Cephisus, is the tomb of
Theodorus, one of the best tragic actors of his day. And there are two
statues near the river, Mnesimaches, and his son cutting off his hair
as a votive offering to the Cephisus. That it was an ancient custom for
all the Greeks to cut off locks of their hair to rivers one would infer
from the verses of Homer, who describes Peleus as vowing to cut off
his hair to the river Spercheus if his son Achilles returned safe from
Troy.[10]

  On the other side of the Cephisus is an ancient altar to Milichian
(_i.e._ _mild_) Zeus, where Theseus got purified after slaying the
progeny of Phytalus. He had slain other robbers, and Sinis, who was his
relation by Pittheus his maternal grandfather. And there are the tombs
here of Theodectes the son of Phaselites, and of Mnesitheus. This last
they say was a noted doctor, and dedicated several statues, and among
them one of Iacchus. And by the roadside is a small temple called the
temple of Cyamites (_Bean-man_): but I have no certain information,
whether he first sowed beans, or whether they gave the name to some
hero, because it was not lawful to ascribe the invention of beans to
Demeter. And whoever has seen the Eleusinian mysteries, or has read the
Orphic poems, knows what I mean. And of the tombs that are finest for
size and beauty are two especially, one of a Rhodian who had migrated
to Athens, the other of Pythionice, made by Harpalus a Macedonian, who
had fled from Alexander and sailed to Europe from Asia, and coming
to Athens was arrested by the Athenians, but escaped by bribing
the friends of Alexander and others, and before this had married
Pythionice, whose extraction I don’t know, but she was a courtesan both
at Athens and Corinth. He was so enamoured of her that, when she died,
he raised this monument to her, the finest of all the ancient works of
art in Greece.

  And there is a temple in which are statues of Demeter and Proserpine
and Athene and Apollo: but originally the temple was built to Apollo
alone. For they say that Cephalus the son of Deioneus went with
Amphitryon to the Teleboæ, and was the first dweller in the island
which is now called from him Cephallenia: and that he fled from Athens,
and lived for some time at Thebes, because he had murdered his wife
Procris. And in the tenth generation afterwards Chalcinus and Dætus
his descendants sailed to Delphi, and begged of the god permission to
return to Athens: and he ordered them first to sacrifice to Apollo on
the spot where they should see a trireme on land moving. And when they
got to the mountain called Pœcilus a dragon appeared eagerly running
into its hole: and here they sacrificed to Apollo, and afterwards on
their arrival at Athens the Athenians made them citizens. Next to this
is a temple of Aphrodite, and before it a handsome wall of white stone.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.


Now the channels called Rheti are like rivers only in their flow, for
their water is sea water. And one might suppose that they flow from
the Euripus near Chalcis underground, falling into a sea with a lower
level. These Rheti are said to be sacred to Proserpine and Demeter,
and their priests only may catch the fish in them. And they were,
as I hear, in old times the boundaries between the territory of the
Eleusinians and Athenians. And the first inhabitant on the other side
of the Rheti was Crocon, and that district is called to this day the
kingdom of Crocon. This Crocon the Athenians say married Sæsara the
daughter of Celeus. This at least is the tradition of the occupants
of the township of Scambonidæ. Crocon’s tomb indeed I could not find,
but Eumolpus’ tomb the Athenians and Eubœans both show. This Eumolpus
they say came from Thrace, and was the son of Poseidon and Chione: and
Chione was they say the daughter of Boreas and Orithyia. Homer has
not indeed given us his pedigree, but he calls him in his poem a noble
man. And in the battle between the people of Eleusis and the Athenians
Erechtheus the king of Athens was slain, and also Immaradus the son of
Eumolpus: and peace was concluded on these conditions, that the people
of Eleusis should be in all other respects Athenians, but should have
the private management of their Mysteries. And the rites of the two
goddesses, Demeter and Proserpine, were performed by the daughters of
Celeus. Pamphus and Homer alike call them by the names Diogenea, and
Pammerope, and Sæsara. But on the death of Eumolpus Ceryx the youngest
son was the only one left, who (the heralds say) was not the son of
Eumolpus at all, but the son of Hermes by Aglaurus the daughter of
Cecrops.

  There is also a hero-chapel to Hippothoon, from whom a tribe gets its
name, and near it one to Zarex, who is said to have learnt music of
Apollo. But my own idea is that Zarex was a stranger, a Lacedæmonian
who had come into Attica, and that the city Zarex in Laconia by the
sea was called after him. But if the hero Zarex was a native of
Attica, I know nothing about him. And the river Cephisus flows near
the Eleusinian territory with greater speed than before: and here
is a place called Erineus, where Pluto they say descended, when he
carried off Proserpine. On the banks of this river Theseus slew the
robber Polypemon, who was surnamed Procrustes. And the Eleusinians
have a temple to Triptolemus, and to Propylæan Artemis, and to Father
Poseidon, and a well called Callichorus, where the Eleusinian women
first danced and sang songs to the goddess. And the Rharian plain
was the first sown and the first that produced crops according to
tradition, and this is the reason why it is the custom to use barley
from it to make cakes for the sacrifices. Here is shown Triptolemus’
threshing-floor and altar. But what is inside the sacred wall I am
forbidden by a dream to divulge, for those who are uninitiated, as
they are forbidden sight of them, so also clearly may not hear of the
mysteries. And the hero Eleusis, from whom the city gets its name, was
according to some the son of Hermes and Daira the daughter of Oceanus,
others make him the son of Ogygus. For the ancients, when they had no
data for their pedigrees, invented fictitious ones, and especially in
the pedigrees of heroes.

  And as you turn from Eleusis to Bœotia the boundary of Attica is
the Platæan district. That was the old boundary between the Athenians
and the people of Eleutheræ. But when the people of Eleutheræ became
Athenians then Mount Cithæron in Bœotia became the boundary. And the
people of Eleutheræ became Athenians not by compulsion, but from hatred
to the Thebans and a liking for the Athenian form of government. In
this plain too is a temple of Dionysus, and a statue of the god was
removed thence to Athens long ago: the one at Eleutheræ now is an
imitation of it. And at some distance is a small grotto, and near it a
spring of cold water. And it is said that Antiope gave birth to twins
and left them in this grotto, and a shepherd finding them near the
spring gave them their first bath in it, having stript them of their
swaddling clothes. And there was still in my day remains of a wall and
buildings at Eleutheræ. This makes it clear that it was a town built a
little above the plain towards Mount Cithæron.




CHAPTER XXXIX.


And another road leads from Eleusis to Megara: as you go along this
road is a well called the Well of Flowers. Pamphus records that it
was at this well that Demeter sat in the guise of an old woman after
the rape of Proserpine: and that she was taken thence as an old woman
of the country by the daughters of Celeus to their mother, and that
Metanira entrusted her with the education of her son. And not far
from the well is the temple of Metanira, and next to it the tombs of
those that fell at Thebes. For Creon, who was at that time the ruler
at Thebes (being Regent for Laodamas the son of Eteocles), would not
allow their relations to bury the dead: and Adrastus having supplicated
Theseus, and a battle having been fought between the Athenians and
Bœotians, when Theseus was the victor, he conveyed the dead bodies
to Eleusis and there buried them. But the Thebans say that they
surrendered the dead bodies of their own free will, and did not fight
on this question. And next to the tombs of the Argives is the monument
of Alope, who they say was the mother of Hippothoon by Poseidon,
and was in consequence put to death by her father Cercyon. Now this
Cercyon is said in other respects to have been harsh to strangers, and
especially to those who would not contend with him in wrestling: and
this place was called even in my day Cercyon’s wrestling ground, at a
little distance from the tomb of Alope. And Cercyon is said to have
killed all that wrestled with him but Theseus. But Theseus wrestled
against him cunningly throw for throw and beat him: for he was the
first who elevated wrestling into a science, and afterwards established
training schools for wrestling: for before the time of Theseus only
size and strength were made use of in wrestling.

  Such in my opinion are the most noteworthy among Athenian traditions
or sights. And in my account I have selected out of a mass of material
that only which was important enough to be considered history.

  Next to Eleusis is the district called Megaris: it too belonged
originally to the Athenians, having been bequeathed to Pandion by (its)
king Pylas. Proofs of what I assert are the tomb of Pandion in that
district, and the fact that Nisus, though he conceded the kingdom of
Attica to Ægeus the head of the family, yet himself was selected to
be king of Megara and the whole district up to Corinth: and even now
the Megarians have a dockyard called Nisæa after him. And afterwards,
when Codrus was king, the Peloponnesians marched against Athens: and
not having any brilliant success there they went home again, but took
Megara from the Athenians, and gave it to the Corinthians and others
of their allies that wished to dwell in it. Thus the Megarians changed
their customs and dialect and became Dorians. And they say the city
got its name in the days of Car, the son of Phoroneus, who was king in
this district: in his day they say first temples were built to Demeter
among them, and the inhabitants called them Halls.[11] This is at
any rate the tradition of the Megarians. But the Bœotians say that
Megareus the son of Poseidon lived at Onchestus, and went with an army
of Bœotians to aid Nisus in his war against Minos, and that he fell in
the battle, and got buried there, and the city which had been formerly
called Nisa, got its name Megara from him. And years afterwards, in the
12th generation from Car, the son of Phoroneus, the Megarians say Lelex
came from Egypt and became king, and during his reign the Megarians
were called Leleges. And he had a son Cleson, and a grandson Pylas,
and a great-grandson Sciron, who married the daughter of Pandion, and
afterwards, (Sciron having a controversy with Nisus the son of Pandion
about the sovereignty), Æacus was arbitrator, and gave his decision
that the kingdom was to belong to Nisus and his descendants, but the
command of the army was to devolve upon Sciron. And Megareus the son of
Poseidon, having married Iphinoe the daughter of Nisus, succeeded Nisus
they say in the kingdom. But of the Cretan war, and the capture of the
city in the days of King Nisus, they pretend to know nothing.




CHAPTER XL.


There is in the city a conduit erected by Theagenes, of whom I
mentioned before that he married his daughter to Cylon an Athenian.
This Theagenes when he was king erected this conduit, well worth seeing
for its size and beauty and the number of its pillars. And the water
that flows into is called after the Sithnidian Nymphs, who, according
to the Megarian tradition, are natives, and one of them bare a son
to Zeus, whose name was Megarus, and who escaped Deucalion’s flood
by getting to the top of Mount Gerania (_Cranemountain_), which was
not the original name of the mountain, but was so called because he
followed in his swimming the flight of some cranes by their cry. And
not far from this conduit is an ancient temple, and there are some
statues in it of Roman Emperors, and an image of Artemis in brass
by the name of Saviour. The story goes that some men in the army of
Mardonius who had overrun Megaris wished to return to Thebes to join
Mardonius, but by the contrivance of Artemis wandered about all night,
and lost their way, and got into the mountainous part of the country,
and, endeavouring to ascertain if the enemy’s army was about, shot some
arrows, and the rock shot at returned a groan, and they shot again and
again furiously. And at last their arrows were expended in shooting
at their supposed foes. And when day dawned, and the Megarians really
did attack them, (well armed against men badly armed and now _minus_
ammunition), they slew most of them. And this is why they put up an
image to Artemis the Saviour. Here too are images of the so-called 12
gods, the production of Praxiteles. He also made an Artemis of the
Strongylii. And next, as you enter the sacred enclosure of Zeus called
the Olympieum, there is a temple well worth seeing: the statue of Zeus
is not finished in consequence of the war between the Peloponnesians
and the Athenians, in which the Athenians every year by land and by
sea injured the Megarians both publicly and privately, ravaging their
territory, and bringing them individually to the greatest poverty.
And the head of this statue of Zeus is of ivory and gold, but the
other parts are of clay and earthenware: and they say it was made by
Theocosmus a native, assisted by Phidias. And above the head of Zeus
are the Seasons and the Fates: it is plain to all that Fate is his
servant, and that he orders the Seasons as is meet. In the back part of
the temple there are some wooden figures only half finished: Theocosmus
intended to finish them when he had adorned the statue of Zeus with
ivory and gold. And in the temple there is the brazen ram of a trireme,
which was they say taken at Salamis, in the sea fight against the
Athenians. The Athenians do not deny that there was for some time a
defection on the part of Salamis to the Megarians, but Solon they say
by his elegiac verses stirred the Athenians up, and they fought for
it, and eventually retook it. But the Megarians say that some of their
exiles, called Doryclei, mixed themselves among the inhabitants and
betrayed Salamis to the Athenians. And next to the enclosure of Zeus,
as you ascend the Acropolis still called the Carian from Car the son
of Phoroneus, is the temple of Nyctelian Dionysus, and the temple of
Aphrodite the Procuress, and the Oracle of Night, and a roofless
temple of dusty Zeus. And statues of Æsculapius and Hygiea, both the
work of Bryaxis. Here too is the sacred Hall of Demeter: which they say
was erected by Car when he was king.




CHAPTER XLI.


As you descend from the Acropolis in a Northerly direction, you come
to the sepulchre of Alcmene near the Olympieum. She died they say at
Megara on her journey from Argos to Thebes, and the sons of Hercules
had a dispute, some wishing to take her dead body to Argos, others to
Thebes: for the sons of Hercules by Megara were buried at Thebes, as
also Amphitryon’s sons. But Apollo at Delphi gave the oracular response
that it would be better for them to bury Alcmena at Megara. From this
place the interpreter of national Antiquities took me to a place called
Rhun (_Flow_), so called because some water flowed here from the hills
above the city, but Theagenes when he was king diverted the water
into another direction, and erected here an altar to Achelous. And at
no great distance is the monument of Hyllus the son of Hercules, who
fought in single combat with the Arcadian Echemus, the son of Aeropus.
Who this Echemus was that slew Hyllus I shall shew in another place,
but Hyllus is buried at Megara. The expedition to the Peloponnese, when
Orestes was king, might rightly be called an expedition of the sons
of Hercules. And not far from the monument of Hyllus is the temple of
Isis, and near it the temple of Apollo and Artemis. This last they say
was built by Alcathous, after he had slain the lion that was called
the lion of Mount Cithæron. This lion had they say devoured several
Megarians and among them the king’s son Euippus: whose elder brother
Timalcus had been killed by Theseus still earlier, when he went
with Castor and Pollux to the siege of Aphidna. Megareus therefore
promised his daughter in marriage, and the succession to the kingdom,
to whoever should kill the lion of Mount Cithæron. So Alcathous (the
son of Pelops) attacked the beast and slew him, and, when he became
king built this temple, dedicating it to Huntress Artemis and Hunter
Apollo. This at any rate is the local tradition. But though I don’t
want to contradict the Megarians, I cannot find myself in agreement
with them entirely, for though I quite admit that the lion of Mount
Cithæron was killed by Alcathous, yet who ever recorded that Timalcus
the son of Megareus went to Aphidna with Castor and Pollux? And how (if
he had gone there) could he have been thought to have been killed by
Theseus, seeing that Alcman in his Ode to Castor and Pollux, recording
how they took Athens, and carried away captive the mother of Theseus,
yet says that Theseus was away? Pindar also gives a very similar
account, and says that Theseus wished to be connected by marriage with
Castor and Pollux, till he went away to help Pirithous in his ambitious
attempt to wed Proserpine. But whoever drew up the genealogy plainly
knew the simplicity of the Megarians, since Theseus was the descendant
of Pelops. But indeed the Megarians purposely hide the real state of
things, not wishing to own that their city was captured when Nisus was
king, and that Megareus who succeeded to the kingdom was the son in law
of Nisus, and that Alcathous was the son in law of Megareus. But it is
certain that it was not till after the death of Nisus, and a revolution
at Megara, that Alcathous came there from Elis. And this is my proof.
He built up the wall anew, when the whole of the old wall had been
demolished by the Cretans. Let this suffice for Alcathous and the lion,
whether he slew the lion on Mount Cithæron or somewhere else, before he
erected the temple to Huntress Artemis and Hunter Apollo.

  As you descend from this temple is the hero-chapel of Pandion, who,
as I have already shewn, was buried at what is called the rock of
Athene the Diver. He has also divine honours paid to him at Megara.
And near the hero-chapel of Pandion is the monument of Hippolyta. This
is the Megarian tradition about her. When the Amazons, on account of
Antiope, made an expedition against the Athenians, they were beaten
by Theseus, and most of them (it so happened) fell in battle, but
Hippolyta (the sister of Antiope), who was at that time leader of the
Amazons, fled to Megara with the remnant of them, and there, having
been unsuccessful with her army, and dejected at the present state
of things, and still more despondent about getting safe home again to
Themiscyra, died of grief and was buried. And the device on her tomb
is an Amazon’s shield. And not far distant is the tomb of Tereus, who
married Procne the daughter of Pandion. Tereus was king (according to
the Megarian tradition) of Pagæ in Megaris, but in my opinion (and
there are still extant proofs of what I state) he was king of Daulis
N.W. of Chæronea: for most of what is now called Hellas was inhabited
in old time by barbarians. And his subjects would no longer obey
Tereus after his vile conduct to Philomela, and after the murder of
Itys by Procne and Philomela. And he committed suicide at Megara, and
they forthwith piled up a tomb for him, and offer sacrifices to him
annually, using pebbles in the sacrifice instead of barley. And they
say the hoopoe was first seen here. And Procne and Philomela went to
Athens, and lamenting what they had suffered and done melted away in
tears: and the tradition that they were changed into a nightingale
and swallow is, I fancy, simply that these birds have a sorrowful and
melancholy note.




CHAPTER XLII.


There is also another citadel at Megara that gets its name from
Alcathous. As one goes up to it, there is on the right hand a monument
of Megareus, who started from Onchestus to aid the Megarians in the
Cretan War. There is also shown an altar of the gods called Prodromi:
and they say that Alcathous first sacrificed to them when he was
commencing to build his wall. And near this altar is a stone, on which
they say Apollo put his harp down, while he assisted Alcathous in
building the wall. And the following fact proves that the Megarians
were numbered among the Athenians: Peribœa the daughter of Alcathous
was certainly sent by him to Crete with Theseus in connection with the
tribute. And Apollo, as the Megarians say, assisted him in building the
wall, and laid his harp down on the stone: and if one chances to hit
it with a pebble, it sounds like a harp being played. This inspired
great wonder in me, but not so much as the Colossus in Egypt. At
Thebes in Egypt, when you cross the Nile, at a place called the Pipes
(_Syringes_), there is a seated statue that has a musical sound, most
people call it Memnon: for he they say went from Ethiopia to Egypt and
even to Susa. But the Thebans say it was a statue not of Memnon, but
Phamenophes a Theban, and I have heard people say it was Sesostris.
This statue Cambyses cut in two: and now the head to the middle of
the body lies on the ground, but the lower part remains in a sitting
posture, and every morning at sunrise resounds with melody, and the
sound it most resembles is that of a harp or lyre with a chord broken.

  And the Megarians have a council chamber, which was once as they say
the tomb of Timalcus, who, as I said a little time back, was killed
by Theseus. And on the hill where the citadel stands is a temple of
Athene, and a brazen statue of the goddess, except the hands and the
toes, which as well as the face are of ivory. And there is another
temple here of Athene called Victory, and another of her as Aiantis.
As regards the latter, all mention of it is passed over by the
interpreters of curiosities at Megara, but I will write my own ideas.
Telamon the son of Æacus married Peribœa the daughter of Alcathous. I
imagine then that Aias, having succeeded to the kingdom of Alcathous,
made this statue of Athene Aiantis.

  The old temple of Apollo was made of brick: but afterwards the
Emperor Adrian built it of white stone. The statues called Apollo
Pythius and Apollo Decataphorus are very like Egyptian statues, but the
one they call Archegetes is like Æginetan handiwork. And all alike are
made of ebony. I heard a Cyprian, a cunning herbalist, say that the
ebony has neither leaves nor fruit, and that it is never seen exposed
to the sun, but its roots are underground, and the Ethiopians dig them
up, and there are men among them who know how to find it. There is
also a temple of Law-giving Demeter. And as you go down from thence
is the tomb of Callipolis the son of Alcathous. Alcathous had also an
elder son called Ischepolis, whom his father sent to assist Meleager in
Ætolia against the Calydonian boar. And when he was killed Callipolis
heard the news first in this place: and he ran to the citadel, where
his father was sacrificing to Apollo, and threw down the wood from the
altar. And Alcathous, not having yet heard the news about Ischepolis,
was vexed with Callipolis for his irreverence, and in his wrath killed
him instantaneously by striking him on the head with one of the pieces
of wood he had thrown down from the altar.

  On the road to the Prytaneum there is a hero-chapel of Ino, and
a cornice of stone round it. Some olive-trees also grow there. The
Megarians are the only Greeks that say that the dead body of Ino was
cast on the shore of Megaris, and that Cleso and Tauropolis, the
daughters of Cleso and granddaughters of Lelex, found it and buried
it. And they say that Ino was called by them first Leucothea, and they
sacrifice to her every year.




CHAPTER XLIII.


They also lay claim to the possession of a mortuary-chapel of
Iphigenia, for she too they say died at Megara. But I have heard a
different account of Iphigenia from the Arcadians, and I know that
Hesiod in his Catalogue of Women describes Iphigenia as not dying, but
being changed into Hecate by the will of Artemis. And Herodotus[12]
wrote not dissimilarly to this, that the Tauric people in Scythia after
shipwreck sacrifice to a virgin, who is they say Iphigenia the daughter
of Agamemnon. Adrastus also has divine honours among the Megarians:
he too they say died among them (when he was leading the army back
after the capture of Thebes), of old age and sorrow for the death of
Ægialeus. And Agamemnon erected an altar to Artemis at Megara, when he
went to Calchas, a native of the place, to persuade him to join the
expedition to Ilium. And in the Prytaneum they say Euippus the son of
Megareus was buried, and also Ischepolis the son of Alcathous. And
there is a rock near the Prytaneum called _The Calling Rock_, because
Demeter (if there is any truth in the tale), when she wandered about
seeking her daughter, called out for her here. And the Megarian women
still perform a kind of mimic representation of this. And the Megarians
have tombs in the city: one they erected for those who fell fighting
against the Medes, the other, called Æsymnian, is a monument to heroes.
For when Hyperion, the last king of Megara, the son of Agamemnon, was
killed by Sandion on account of his greed and haughtiness, they chose
no longer to be under kingly government, but to have chief magistrates
annually chosen, so as to be under one another’s authority by turn.
Then it was that Æsymnus, second to none of the Megarians in fame and
influence, went to Apollo at Delphi, and asked how they were to have
prosperity. And the god among other things told them they would fare
well if they deliberated on affairs with the majority. Thinking these
words had reference to the dead, they built here a council chamber,
that the tomb of the heroes might be inside their council chamber. As
you go from thence to the hero-chapel of Alcathous, which the Megarians
now use as a Record Office, there are two tombs, one they say of
Pyrgo, the wife of Alcathous before he married Euæchma the daughter of
Megareus, the other of Iphinoe the daughter of Alcathous, who they say
died unmarried. At her tomb it is the custom of maidens before marriage
to pour libations, and sacrifice some of their long hair, as the
maidens of Delos used to do to Hecaerge and Opis. And near the entrance
to the temple of Dionysus are the tombs of Astycratea and Manto, the
daughters of Polyidus, (the son of Cœranus, the son of Abas, the son of
Melampus,) who went to Megara, and purged Alcathous for the murder of
his son Callipolis. And Polyidus also built the temple of Dionysus, and
erected a statue of the god veiled in my day except the face: that is
visible. And a Satyr is near Dionysus, the work of Praxiteles in Parian
marble. And this they call Tutelary Dionysus, and another they call
Dionysus Dasyllius (_the Vine-ripener_), and this statue they say was
erected by Euchenor the son of Cœranus the son of Polyidus. And next to
the temple of Dionysus is the shrine of Aphrodite, and a statue of the
goddess in ivory, under the title Praxis (_Action_). This is the oldest
statue in the shrine. And _Persuasion_ and another goddess whom they
call _Consolation_ are by Praxiteles: and by Scopas _Love_ and _Desire_
and _Yearning_, each statue expressing the particular shade of meaning
marked by the words. And near the shrine of Aphrodite is the temple
of Chance: this too is by Praxiteles. And in the neighbouring temple
Lysippus has made the Muses and a brazen Zeus.

  The Megarians also have the tomb of Corœbus: the verses about him I
shall relate here though they are also Argive intelligence. In the days
when Crotopus was king in Argos, his daughter Psamathe they say had
a child by Apollo, and being greatly afraid of her father knowing it
exposed the child. And some sheep dogs of Crotopus lit upon the child
and killed it, and Apollo sent upon the city _Punishment_, a monster
who took children away from their mothers (they say), till Corœbus
killed it to ingratiate himself with the Argives. And after killing it,
as a second plague came on them and vexed them sore, Corœbus of his own
accord went to Delphi, and offered to submit to the punishment of the
god for killing _Punishment_. The Pythian priestess forbade Corœbus
to return to Argos, but told him to carry a tripod from the temple,
and wherever the tripod should fall, there he was to build a temple to
Apollo and himself dwell. And the tripod slipt out of his hand and fell
(without his contrivance) on the mountain Gerania, and there he built
the village Tripodisci. And his tomb is in the market-place at Megara:
and there are some elegiac verses on it that relate to Psamathe and
Corœbus himself, and a representation on the tomb of Corœbus killing
Punishment. These statues are the oldest Greek ones in stone that I
have myself seen.




CHAPTER XLIV.


Next Corœbus is buried Orsippus, who, though the athletes according to
olden custom had girdles round their loins, ran naked at Olympia in
the race and won the prize. And they say that he afterwards as general
cut off a slice of his neighbours’ territory. But I think at Olympia
he dropped his girdle on purpose, knowing that it is easier for a
man to run naked than with a girdle on. And as you descend from the
market-place by the way called Straight, there is on the right hand a
temple of Protecting Apollo: you can find it by turning a little out
of the way. And there is in it a statue of Apollo well worth seeing,
and an Artemis and Leto, and other statues, and Leto and her sons by
Praxiteles. And there is in the ancient gymnasium, near the gates
called Nymphades, a stone in shape like a small pyramid. This they
call Apollo Carinus, and there is here a temple to Ilithyia also.
Such are the notable things the city contains. And as you descend to
the dockyard, which is still called Nisæa, is a temple of Demeter the
Wool-bearer. Several explanations are given of this title, among them
that those who first reared sheep in this country gave her that name.
And one would conjecture that the roof had fallen from the temple by
the lapse of time. There is here also a citadel called Nisæa. And as
you descend from it there is near the sea a monument of Lelex the
king, who is said to have come from Egypt, and to have been the son of
Poseidon by Libye the daughter of Epaphus. There is an island too near
Nisæa of no great size called Minoa. Here the navy of the Cretans was
moored in the war with Nisus. And the mountainous part of Megaris is on
the borders of Bœotia, and contains two towns, Pagæ and Ægosthena. As
you go to Pagæ, if you turn a little off from the regular road, there
is shewn the rock which has arrows fixed in it everywhere, into which
the Medes once shot in the night. At Pagæ too well worth seeing is a
brazen statue of Artemis under the title of _Saviour_, in size and
shape like the statues of the goddess at Megara. There is also here
a hero-chapel of Ægialeus the son of Adrastus. He, when the Argives
marched against Thebes the second time, was killed in the first battle
at Glisas, and his relations carried him to Pagæ in Megaris, and buried
him there, and the hero-chapel is still called after his name. And at
Ægosthena is a temple of Melampus the son of Amythaon, and a man of
no great size is carved on a pillar. And they sacrifice to Melampus
and have a festival to him every year. But they say that he has no
prophetic powers either in dreams or in any other way. And I also heard
at Erenea a village of Megaris, that Autonoe the daughter of Cadmus,
excessively grieving at the death of Actæon, and the circumstances
of it which tradition records, and the general misfortunes of her
father’s house, migrated there from Thebes: and her tomb is in that
village.

  And as you go from Megara to Corinth there are several tombs, and
among them that of the Samian flute-player Telephanes. And they say
that this tomb was erected by Cleopatra, the daughter of Philip the
son of Amyntas. And there is a monument of Car the son of Phoroneus,
originally only a mound of earth, but afterwards in consequence of the
oracle it was beautified with a shell-like stone. And the Megarians
are the only Greeks who possess this peculiar kind of stone, and many
things in their city are made of it. It is very white, and softer than
other stone, and seashells are everywhere in it. Such is this kind of
stone. And the road, called the Scironian road after Sciron, is so
called because Sciron, when he was commander in chief of the Megarians,
first made it a road for travellers according to tradition. And the
Emperor Adrian made it so wide and convenient that two chariots could
drive abreast.

  Now there are traditions about the rocks which project in the narrow
part of the road; with regard to the Molurian rock, that Ino threw
herself into the sea from it with Melicerta, the younger of her sons:
for Learchus the oldest was killed by his father. Athamas also is
said to have acted in the same way when mad, and to have exhibited
ungovernable rage to Ino and her children, thinking that the famine
which befell the Orchomenians, which also apparently caused the
death of Phrixus, was not the visitation of God, but a stepmother’s
contrivance against them all. So she to escape him threw herself and
her boy Melicerta into the sea from the Molurian rock. And the boy,
being carried it is said by a dolphin to the Isthmus of Corinth, had
various honours paid to him under the name of Palæmon, and the Isthmian
games were celebrated in his honour. This Molurian rock they consider
sacred to Leucothea and Palæmon, but the rocks next to it they consider
accursed, because Sciron lived near them, who threw into the sea all
strangers that chanced to come there. And a tortoise used to swim about
near these rocks, so as to devour those that were thrown in: these sea
tortoises are like land tortoises, except in size and the shape of
their feet which are like those of seals. But the whirligig of time
which brought on Sciron punishment for all this, for he himself was
thrown by Theseus into the same sea. And on the top of the mountain is
a temple to Zeus called the Remover. They say that Zeus was so called
because when a great drought once happened to the Greeks, and Æacus in
obedience to the oracle prayed to Pan-Hellenian Zeus at Ægina, he took
it away and removed it. Here are also statues of Aphrodite and Apollo
and Pan. And as you go on a little further is the tomb of Eurystheus.
They say that he fled here from Attica after the battle with the
Heraclidæ, and was killed by Iolaus. As you descend this road is a
temple of Latoan Apollo, and near to it the boundaries between Megaris
and Corinth, where they say Hyllus the son of Hercules had a single
combat with the Arcadian Echemus.




FOOTNOTES:

[2] A stade was about one-eighth of a Roman mile.

[3] Odyssey, xi., 122, 123.

[4] See Plutarch’s “Life of Theseus.”

[5] Iliad, xxiii., 677-680.

[6] See Herod., iii., 64.

[7] Perhaps a reminiscence of Hom. Il. i. 423.

[8] See Verg. Ecl. 3. 106. Theocr. x. 28. And especially Ovid,
Metamorph. x. 210-219.

[9] Demeter and Proserpine.

[10] Iliad xxiii. 144-148.

[11] The Greek is _Megara_. Hence the paronomasia.

[12] Herod. iv. 99, and 103.




BOOK II.--CORINTH.




CHAPTER I.


The Corinthian territory, a part of Argolis, gets its name from
Corinthus, and that he was the son of Zeus I know of none who seriously
assert but most Corinthians, for Eumelus the son of Amphilytus of the
race called Bacchidæ, who is also said to have been a poet, says in
his History of Corinth (if indeed he is the author of it), that Ephyre
the daughter of Oceanus, dwelt first in this land, and that afterwards
Marathon the son of Epopeus, the son of Aloeus, the son of the Sun,
fled from the lawless insolence of his father, and took a colony into
the maritime parts of Attica, and when Epopeus was dead returned to the
Peloponnese, and after dividing the kingdom among his sons went back
into Attica, and from his son Sicyon Asopia got the name of Sicyonia,
and Ephyrea got called Corinth from his son Corinthus.

  Now Corinth is inhabited by none of the ancient Corinthians, but by
colonists who were sent there by the Romans. And this is owing to the
Achæan confederacy. For the Corinthians joined it, and took their part
in the war with the Romans which Critolaus, who had been appointed
commander in chief of the Achæans, brought about, having persuaded
the Achæans and most of the Greeks outside the Peloponnese to revolt
against Rome. And the Romans, after conquering all the other Greeks in
battle, took away from them their arms, and razed the fortifications of
all the fortified cities: but they destroyed Corinth under Mummius the
General of the Roman army, and they say it was rebuilt by Julius Cæsar,
who instituted the present form of government at Rome, (the Imperial).
Carthage also was rebuilt in his term of power.

  Now the place called Crommyon in the Corinthian territory is so
called from Cromus the son of Poseidon. Here they say was the haunt of
the Phæan boar, and the scene of Theseus’ legendary exploits against
Pityocamptes, (the _Pinebender_). As you go forward the famous pine was
to be seen even in my time near the seashore; and there was an altar to
Melicerta there, for it was here they say that he was conveyed by the
dolphin: and Sisyphus, finding him lying dead on the shore, buried him
at the Isthmus, and established the Isthmian games in honour of him.
Now it is at the head of the Isthmus that the robber Sinis took two
pine-trees and bent them down to the ground: and whoever he conquered
in battle he tied to these pine-trees, and let the pines go up into
the air again: and each of these pines dragged the poor fellow tied to
it, and (neither yielding but pulling with equal vigour) the victim
tied to them was torn asunder. In this way Sinis himself was killed
by Theseus. For Theseus cleared all the road from Trœzen to Athens
of evildoers, having killed those whom I mentioned before, and, at
Epidaurus the Holy, Periphetes the putative son of Hephæstus, whose
weapon in fighting was a brazen club. The Isthmus of Corinth extends
in one direction to the sea near Cenchreæ, and in the other to the
sea near Lechæum. This Isthmus makes the Peloponnese a Peninsula. And
whoever attempted to make the Peloponnese an island died before the
completion of a canal across the Isthmus. And where they began to dig
is now plainly visible, but they didn’t make much progress because
of the rock. The Peloponnese remains therefore what it was by nature
main land. And when Alexander, the son of Philip, wished to make a
canal through Mimas, the work was all but completed. But the oracle
at Delphi forbade the navvies to complete the work. So difficult is
it for man to oppose the divine ordinances. And the Corinthians are
not alone in their boasting about their country, but it seems to me
that the Athenians even earlier used tall talk in regard to Attica.
The Corinthians say that Poseidon had a controversy with the Sun about
their land, and that Briareus was the Arbitrator, awarding the Isthmus
and all in that direction to Poseidon, and giving the height above
the city to the Sun. From this time they say the Isthmus belongs to
Poseidon.

  The great sights at Corinth are the Theatre, and the Stadium of
white stone. And as you approach the temple of the god, there are
statues of the Athletes who have been conquerors in the Isthmian games
on one side, and on the other pine-trees planted in a row, mostly in
a straight line. And at the temple, which is not very large, there
stand some Tritons in brass. And there are statues in the porch two of
Poseidon, and one of Amphitrite, and a brazen Sea. And inside Herod an
Athenian placed in our time 4 horses all gold except the hoofs, which
are of ivory. And two golden Tritons are near the horses, ivory below
the waist. And Amphitrite and Poseidon are standing in a chariot, and
their son Palæmon is seated bolt upright on the dolphin’s back: and
these are made of ivory and gold. And on the middle of the base, on
which the chariot rests, is the Sea supporting the child Aphrodite
rising from it, and on each side are the so-called Nereids, who have I
know altars in other parts of Greece, and some have temples dedicated
to them as Shepherdesses, in places where Achilles is also honoured.
And at Doto among the Gabali there is a holy temple, where the peplus
is still kept, which the Greeks say Eriphyle took for her son Alcmæon.
And on the base of Poseidon’s statue are in bas relief the sons of
Tyndareus, because they are the patron saints of ships and sailors.
And the other statues are Calm and Sea, and a horse like a sea-monster
below the waist, and Ino and Bellerophon and Pegasus.




CHAPTER II.


And inside the precincts there is on the left hand a temple of Palæmon,
and some statues in it of Poseidon and Leucothea and Palæmon himself.
And there is also a crypt, approached by an underground passage,
where they say Palæmon is buried: whatever Corinthian or foreigner
commits perjury here has no chance of escaping punishment. There is
also an ancient temple called the altar of the Cyclopes, to whom they
sacrifice upon it. But the tombs of Sisyphus and Neleus, (for they say
that Neleus came to Corinth, and died there of some disease, and was
buried near the Isthmus), no one could find from the account in the
poems of Eumelus. As to Neleus they say that his tomb was not even
shewn to Nestor by Sisyphus: for it was to be unknown to all alike.
But that Sisyphus was buried at the Isthmus, and indeed the very site
of his tomb, a few Corinthians who were his contemporaries know. And
the Isthmian games did not fall into disuse when Corinth was taken by
Mummius, but as long as the city lay desolate, these games took place
at Sicyon, and when the city was rebuilt the old honour came back to
Corinth.

  The Corinthian seaports got their names from Leches and Cenchrias,
who were reputed to be the sons of Poseidon by Pirene the daughter of
Achelous: though in Hesiod’s poem _the great Eœæ_ Pirene is said to be
the daughter of Œbalus. And there is at Lechæum a temple and brazen
statue of Poseidon, and as you go to Cenchreæ from the Isthmus a temple
of Artemis, and old wooden statue of the goddess. And at Cenchreæ there
is a shrine of Aphrodite and her statue in stone, and next it, on the
breakwater near the sea, a brazen statue of Poseidon. And on the other
side of the harbour are temples of Æsculapius and Isis. And opposite
Cenchreæ is the bath of Helen: where much salt water flows into the sea
from the rock, like water just with the chill off.

  As you go up the hill to Corinth there are several tombs along the
wayside, and at the gate is buried Diogenes of Sinope, whom the Greeks
nickname the Cynic. And in front of the city is a grove of cypress
trees called Craneum. Here is a temple of Bellerophon, and a shrine
of Melænian Aphrodite, and the tomb of Lais, with a lioness carved
on it with a ram in its front paws. And there is another monument of
Lais said to exist in Thessaly: for she went to Thessaly when she
was enamoured of Hippostratus. She is said to have come originally
from Hyccara in Sicily, and to have been taken prisoner as a child by
Nicias and the Athenians, and to have been sold at Corinth, and to have
outstripped in beauty all the courtesans there, and so admired was she
by the Corinthians that even now they claim her as a Corinthian.

  The notable things in the city are partly the remains of antiquity
still to be seen there, partly works of art more recent, when Corinth
was at the height of all her glory. In the market-place, for most of
the temples are there, is Ephesian Artemis, and there are two wooden
statues of Dionysus gilt except the faces, which are painted with
red paint, one they call Lysian Dionysus, and the other Dionysus the
Reveller. The tradition about these statues I will record. Pentheus
they say, when he outraged Dionysus, among other acts of reckless
daring actually at last went to Mount Cithæron to spy the women, and
climbed up into a tree to see what they were doing: and when they
detected him, they forthwith dragged him down, and tore him limb from
limb. And afterwards, so they say at Corinth, the Pythian Priestess
told them to discover that tree and pay it divine honours. And that is
why these statues are made of that very wood. There is also a Temple
of Fortune: her statue is in a standing posture, in Parian marble. And
near it is a temple to all the gods. And near it is a conduit, and a
brazen Poseidon on it, and a dolphin under Poseidon’s feet passing the
water. And there is a brazen statue of Apollo called the Clarian, and
a statue of Aphrodite by Hermogenes of Cythera. And both the statues
of Hermes are of brass and in a standing posture, and one of them has
a shrine built for it. And there are three statues of Zeus in the open
air, one has no special title, the second is called Zeus of the Nether
World, and the third Zeus of Highest Heaven.




CHAPTER III.


And in the middle of the market-place is a statue of Athene in brass:
on the base are sculptured effigies of the Muses. And above the
market-place is a temple of Octavia, the sister of Augustus, who was
Emperor of the Romans after Cæsar, the founder of modern Corinth.

  And as you go from the market-place towards Lechæum there are
vestibules, on which are golden chariots, one with Phaethon in it (the
son of the Sun), and the other with the Sun himself in it. And at a
little distance from the vestibules on the right as you enter is a
brazen statue of Hercules. And next to it is the approach to the well
of Pirene. They say that Pirene became a well from a woman through the
tears she shed, bewailing the death of her son Cenchrias at the hands
of Artemis. And the well is beautified with white stone, and there are
cells like caves to match, from which the water trickles into that part
of the well which is in the open air, and it has a sweet taste, and
they say that Corinthian brass when hissing hot is dipped into this
water. There is also a statue of Apollo near Pirene, and some precincts
of the god. There is also a painting of Odysseus taking vengeance on
the suitors.

  And as you go straight on for Lechæum, you will see a brazen Hermes
in a sitting posture, and by it a ram, for Hermes more than any of the
gods is thought to watch over and increase flocks, as indeed Homer
has represented him in the Iliad “The son of Phorbas rich in flocks
and herds, whom Hermes loved most of the Trojans, and increased his
substance.”[13] But the tradition about Hermes and the ram in the rites
of the Great Mother (though I know it) I purposely pass over. And next
to the statue of Hermes are Poseidon and Leucothea, and Palæmon on
the dolphin’s back. And there are several baths in various parts of
Corinth, some erected at the public expense, and others by the Emperor
Adrian. And the most famous of them is near the statue of Poseidon.
It was erected by Eurycles a Spartan, who beautified it with various
stones, amongst others by the stone they dig at Croceæ in Laconia.
On the left of the entrance is a statue of Poseidon, and next to him
one of Artemis hunting. And many conduits have been built in various
parts of the city, as there is abundance of water, as well as the water
which the Emperor Adrian brought from Stymphelus: the handsomest is the
conduit by the statue of Artemis, and on it is a figure of Bellerophon,
and the water flows by the hoof of Pegasus.

  As you go from the market-place towards Sicyon, there is visible on
the right of the road a temple and brazen statue of Apollo, and at a
little distance a well called the well of Glauce: for she threw herself
into it, thinking the water would be an antidote against the poison of
Medea. Above this well is what is called the Odeum. And near it is the
tomb of the sons of Medea, whose names were Mermerus and Pheres, who
are said to have been stoned by the Corinthians because of the gifts
which they took Glauce. But because their death was violent and unjust,
the children of the Corinthians wasted away in consequence, until at
the oracular response of the god yearly sacrifices were ordained for
them, and a statue of Panic erected. This statue still remains to our
day, the figure of a woman represented as feeling the greatest terror.
But since the capture of Corinth by the Romans and the decay of the
old Corinthians, the sacrifices are no longer continued by the new
settlers, nor do their children continue to shear their hair, or wear
black raiment. And Medea when she went to Athens, lived with Ægeus, but
some time after (being detected plotting against Theseus) she had to
fly from Athens also, and going to the country which was then called
Aria, gave her name to its inhabitants, so that they were called Medes
from her. And the son whom she carried off with her when she fled to
the Arians was they say her son by Ægeus, and his name was Medus. But
Hellanicus calls him Polyxenus, and says Jason was his father. And
there are poems among the Greeks called Naupactian: in which Jason
is represented as having migrated from Iolcus to Corcyra after the
death of Pelias, and Mermerus (the elder of his sons) is said to have
been torn to pieces by a lioness, as he was hunting on the mainland
opposite: but about Pheres nothing is recorded. And Cinæthon the
Lacedæmonian, who also wrote Genealogical Poems, said that Jason had
by Medea a son Medeus and a daughter Eriopis: but of any children more
he too has made no mention. But Eumœlus’ account is that the Sun gave
Asopia to Aloeus, and Ephyræa to Æetes: and Æetes went to Colchis, and
left the kingdom to Bunus the son of Hermes and Alcidamea, and after
Bunus’ death, Epopeus reigned over the Ephyræans. And when in after
days Corinthus the son of Marathon died childless, the Corinthians
sent for Medea from Iolcus to hand over the kingdom to her: and it was
through her that Jason became king of Corinth, and Medea had children,
by Jason, but whenever each was born she took it to the temple of
Hera and hid it there, for she thought that by hiding them they would
be immortal: but eventually she learned that she was wrong in this
expectation, and, being at the same time detected by Jason, he would
not forgive her though she pleaded hard for forgiveness, but sailed
away to Iolcus. Eventually Medea herself went away too, and handed over
the kingdom to Sisyphus. This is the account I have read.




CHAPTER IV.


And not far from the tomb of Mermerus and Pheres is the temple of
Athene the _Bridler_: who they say helped Bellerophon more than any of
the gods in various ways, and gave him Pegasus, after having broken
it in and bridled it herself. Her statue is of wood, but the head and
hands and toes are of white stone. That Bellerophon was not absolute
king at Corinth, but limited in his power by Prœtus and the Argives I
am positive, as every one will be who has read Homer carefully. And
when Bellerophon migrated into Lycia, the Corinthians seem just the
same to have obeyed those who were in power at Argos or Mycenæ. And
they had no separate commander-in-chief of their own in the expedition
against Troy, but took part in the expedition only as a contingent with
the men of Mycenæ; and Agamemnon’s other troops. And Sisyphus had as
sons not only Glaucus the father of Bellerophon, but also Ornytion,
and Thersander, and Almus. And Phocus was the son of Ornytion, though
nominally the son of Poseidon. And he colonized Tithorea in what is
now called Phocis, but Thoas, the younger son of Ornytion, remained
at Corinth. And Demophon was the son of Thoas, Propodas the son of
Demophon, Doridas and Hyanthidas the sons of Propodas. During the joint
reign of Doridas and Hyanthidas the Dorians led an expedition against
Corinth, under the command of Aletes the son of Hippotas, (the son
of Phylas, the son of Antiochus, the son of Hercules). Doridas and
Hyanthidas handed over the kingdom to Aletes, and were permitted to
remain at Corinth, but the Corinthian people were expelled, after being
beaten in battle by the Dorians. And Aletes himself and his descendants
reigned for five generations, down to Bacchis the son of Prumnis,
and his descendants the Bacchidæ reigned five more generations, down
to Telestes the son of Aristodemus. And Telestes was slain by Arieus
and Perantas out of hatred, and there were no longer any kings, but
Presidents elected annually from the Bacchidæ, till Cypselus the son
of Eetion drove out the Bacchidæ, and made himself king. He was the
descendant of Melas the son of Antasus. And when Melas joined the
Dorian expedition against Corinth from Gonussa beyond Sicyon, Aletes
at first according to the oracle told him to go to other Greeks, but
afterwards disregarded the oracle and took him as associate. Such is
the result of my researches about the kings of the Corinthians.

  Now the temple of Athene the _Bridler_ is near the theatre, and not
far off is a wooden statue of a naked Hercules, which they say is the
work of Dædalus. All the works of Dædalus are somewhat odd to look at,
but there is a wonderful inspiration about them. And above the theatre
is a temple of Jupiter Capitolinus in the Roman diction, in Greek
it would be Zeus Coryphæus. And not far from this theatre is an old
gymnasium, and a well called Lerna. And there are pillars round it, and
seats to refresh those who come in in summertime. In this gymnasium
there are shrines of the gods, one of Zeus, one of Æsculapius: and
statues of Æsculapius and Hygiea (_Health_) in white stone, and one of
Zeus in brass. As you ascend to Acro-Corinthus, (it is the top of the
hill above the city, Briareus gave it to the Sun, after litigation, and
the Sun, as the Corinthians say, let Aphrodite have it), there are two
temples of Isis, one they call the Pelagian and the other the Egyptian,
and two of Serapis, one under the name of Canobus. And next them are
altars to the Sun, and a temple of Necessity and Force, into which it
is not customary to enter. Above this is a temple of the Mother of
the Gods, and a stone pillar and seat. The temples of the Fates and
Demeter and Proserpine have statues rather dim with age. Here too is a
temple of Bunæan Hera, which Bunus the son of Hermes erected. Hence the
goddess got the title Bunæan.




CHAPTER V.


On the ascent to Acro-Corinthus there is also a temple of Aphrodite:
and statues of her in full armour, and the Sun, and Cupid with a bow.
And the fountain behind the temple is they say the gift of Asopus to
Sisyphus: for he, though he knew that Zeus had carried off Ægina the
daughter of Asopus, refused to tell him unless he would give him this
water on Acro-Corinthus. And Asopus giving this water he vouchsafed
the required information, and for his information pays the penalty
in Hades, if indeed this is credible. But I have heard people say
that this fountain is Pirene, and that the water in the city flows
down from it. This river Asopus has its rise in the neighbourhood of
Phlius, flows through the Sicyonian district, and has its outlet in the
Corinthian Gulf. And the people of Phlius say that Asopus’ daughters
were Corcyra and Ægina and Thebe: and that from Corcyra and Ægina the
islands Scheria and Œnone got their present names, and that Thebe gave
its name to Thebes the city of Cadmus. But the Thebans do not admit
this, for they say that Thebe was the daughter of the Bœotian Asopus,
and not the Asopus that has its rise at Phlius. The Phliasians and
Sicyonians say further about this river that it is foreign and not
indigenous, for Mæander they say flowing down from Celænæ through
Phrygia and Caria, and falling into the sea at Miletus, travelled to
the Peloponnese and made the river Asopus. And I remember to have
heard something of the same kind from the people of Delos of the
river Inopus, which they say came to them from the Nile. And moreover
there is a tradition that the same Nile is the river Euphrates, which
was lost in a lake and re-emerged as the Nile in the remote part of
Ethiopia. This is what I heard about the Asopus. As you turn towards
the mountains from Acro-Corinthus is the Teneatic gate, and a temple
of Ilithyia. Now Tenea is about 60 stades from Corinth. And the people
of Tenea say that they are Trojans, and were carried away captive by
the Greeks from Tenedos, and located here by Agamemnon: and accordingly
Apollo is the god they hold in highest honour.

  And as you go from Corinth along the coast in the direction of Sicyon
there is a temple, which was burnt down, not far from the city on the
left hand of the way. There have been several wars in the neighbourhood
of Corinth, and fire has consumed, as one would indeed expect, both
houses and temples outside the city walls: this was they say a temple
of Apollo, and burnt down by Pyrrhus the son of Achilles. I have also
heard another account, that the Corinthians erected this temple to
Olympian Zeus, and that it was some accidental fire that burnt it down.
And the people of Sicyon, who are near neighbours to the Corinthians,
say of their region that Ægialeus the Autochthon first dwelt there, and
that what is now called Ægialus in the Peloponnese was called after him
its king, and that he was founder of Ægialea a city in the plain: and
that the site of the temple of Apollo was the citadel. And they say
that the son of Ægialeus was Europs, and the son of Europs Telchis,
and the son of Telchis Apis. Now this Apis had grown to such magnitude
before Pelops came to Olympia, that all the land inside the Isthmus
was called after him Apian. And the son of Apis was Thelxion, and the
son of Thelxion was Ægyrus, and his son was Thurimachus, and the son
of Thurimachus was Leucippus, and Leucippus had no male children, and
only one daughter Chalcinia, who they say bore a child to Poseidon, who
was called Peratus, and was brought up by Leucippus, and on his death
succeeded to the kingdom as his heir. And the history of Plemnæus the
son of Peratus seems to me most marvellous. All his children died that
his wife bare to him directly they were born and had uttered the first
cry, till Demeter took compassion on him, and coming to Ægialea as a
stranger to Plemnæus reared his child Orthopolis. And Orthopolis had a
daughter Chrysorthe: she had a child, supposed to be Apollo’s, called
Coronus. And Coronus had Corax and a younger son Lamedon.




CHAPTER VI.


And Corax dying childless, about this time Epopeus came from Thessaly
and obtained the kingdom. In his reign first (they say) did a hostile
army ever come into their country, as they had heretofore in all
time lived in peace. And the origin of the war was this. Antiope
the daughter of Nycteus had a great reputation for beauty among the
Greeks, and there was a rumour about her that she was the daughter of
Asopus, the river that forms the boundary between Thebes and Platæa,
and not the daughter of Nycteus. I know not whether Epopeus asked her
in marriage, or carried her off with more audacious designs from the
beginning. But the Thebans came with an army, and Nycteus was wounded,
and Epopeus too (though he won the victory). Nycteus though very bad
they took back to Thebes, and, when he was on the point of death, he
gave orders that Lycus his brother should be ruler of the Thebans for
the present: for Nycteus himself was Regent for Labdacus, (the son
of Polydorus, the son of Cadmus), who was still a child, and now he
left the Regency to Lycus. He also begged Lycus to go with a larger
force to Ægialea and punish Epopeus, and even to illtreat Antiope if
he could get hold of her. And Epopeus at first offered sacrifices for
his victory and built a temple to Athene, and when it was finished
prayed that the goddess would shew by some sign if it was to her mind,
and after the prayer they say oil trickled in front of the temple.
But afterwards Epopeus chanced to die of his wound which had been
originally neglected, so Lycus had no longer any need of war, for
Lamedon (the son of Coronus) the king after Epopeus gave Antiope up.
And she, as she was being conducted to Thebes, gave birth to a child
on the road near Eleutheræ. And it is in reference to this event that
Asius the son of Amphiptolemus has written the lines, “Antiope, the
daughter of the deep-eddying river Asopus, bare Zethus and divine
Amphion, being pregnant both by Zeus, and Epopeus shepherd of his
people.”

  But Homer[14] has given them a finer pedigree, and says that they
first built Thebes, distinguishing as it seems to me the lower city
from the city built by Cadmus. And King Lamedon married a wife from
Athens, Pheno the daughter of Clytius: and afterwards, when there was
war between him and Archander and Architeles, the sons of Achæus, he
invited Sicyon from Attica to help him, and gave him his daughter
Zeuxippe in marriage, and when he became king the region got called
after him Sicyonia, and the town Sicyon instead of Ægialea. And the
Sicyonians say that Sicyon was not the son of Marathon the son of
Epopeus, but the son of Metion the son of Erechtheus. And Asius agrees
with them. But Hesiod has represented Sicyon as the son of Erechtheus,
and Ibycus says he was the son of Pelops. However Sicyon had a daughter
Chthonophyle, who is said to have had a son Polybus by Hermes: and
afterwards Phlias the son of Dionysus married her, and she had a son
Androdamas. And Polybus gave his daughter Lysianassa to Talaus, the son
of Bias, the king of the Argives: and when Adrastus fled from Argos he
went to Polybus at Sicyon, and after Polybus’ death he obtained the
chief power at Sicyon. But when Adrastus was restored to Argos, then
Ianiscus the descendant of Clytius, the father in law of Lamedon, came
from Attica and became king, and on his death Phæstus, who was reputed
to be one of the sons of Hercules. And Phæstus having migrated to
Crete in accordance with an oracle, Zeuxippus, the son of Apollo and
the nymph Syllis, is said to have become king. And after the death of
Zeuxippus Agamemnon led an army against Sicyon and its king Hippolytus,
the son of Rhopalus, the son of Phæstus. And Hippolytus fearing the
invading army agreed to be subject to Agamemnon and Mycenæ. And this
Hippolytus had a son Lacestades. And Phalces, the son of Temenus,
having seized Sicyon by night in conjunction with the Dorians, did no
harm to Lacestades (as being himself also a descendant of Hercules),
but shared the royal power with him.




CHAPTER VII.


And the Sicyonians became Dorians after this, and a part of Argolis.
And their city, built by Ægialeus in the plain, Demetrius the son of
Antigonus razed to the ground, and built the present city on the site
of what was in former times the citadel. And the reason of the low
fortunes of the Sicyonians one could not find out by investigation, but
one would have to be content with what is said by Homer about Zeus,[15]

    “Who hath brought down the pride of many cities.”

And when they were in a far from favourable condition an earthquake
came on them, and made the city almost bare of men, and robbed them of
many works of art. This earthquake also injured the cities of Caria and
Lycia, and the island of Rhodes suffered especially, insomuch that the
oracle of the Sibyl about Rhodes was fulfilled.

  And as you go from Corinth towards Sicyon you come to the tomb of
Messenian Lycus, whoever this Lycus was. For I find no Messenian Lycus
that practised in the pentathlum, or carried off the prize at Olympia.
This tomb is a mound of earth, and the Sicyonians mostly bury in the
following manner. The body they deposit in the ground, and over it a
stone slab with pillars on the top, on which are figures, generally
like the eagles in the temples. But they write no epitaph, but simply
the name of the deceased, not even his parentage, and bid the dead
farewell. And next to the tomb of Lycus, when you have crossed over the
Asopus, is on the right hand the temple of Olympian Zeus, and a little
further on, on the left side of the road, is the tomb of Eupolis the
Athenian Comedian. Further on in the direction of the city is the tomb
of Xenodice, who died in childbirth: it is unlike the tombs in this
part of the country, and has a painting, which is very fine. A little
further is the tomb of the Sicyonians, who died at Pellene, and Dyme in
Achaia, and at Megalopolis and Sellasia, whose exploits I shall relate
fully later on. And they have near the gate a well in a cave, which
oozes through the roof of the cave, so it is called the Dripping Well.

  And in the present citadel there is a temple to Fortune Dwelling on
the Heights, and next it one to the Dioscuri. Both these and the statue
of Fortune are of wood. And in the theatre built under the citadel the
person represented on the stage-curtain is, they say, Aratus the son
of Clinias. And next to the theatre is a temple of Dionysus: the god
is fashioned in gold and ivory, and near him some Bacchantes in white
stone. These women they say are sacred to Dionysus, and full of Bacchic
fury. And the Sicyonians have other statues in a secret place, which
one night in every year they bring to the temple of Dionysus from the
place called Ornament Room, and they bring them with lighted torches
and national Hymns. The leader of the procession is called Baccheus,
this functionary was appointed by Androdamas the son of Phlias, and
the next in the procession is called Lysius, whom the Theban Phanes
brought from Thebes at the bidding of the Pythian Priestess. And Phanes
came to Sicyon, when Aristomachus the son of Cleodæus, mistaking the
oracle, lost thereby his return to the Peloponnese. And as you go from
the temple of Dionysus to the market-place there is a shrine of Artemis
Limnæa on the right hand. And that the roof has fallen in is clear to
the spectator. But as to the statue of the goddess--for there is none
now--the people of Sicyon do not say whether it was carried away to
some other place, or how it was destroyed (if destroyed).

  And as you enter the market-place is a temple of Persuasion, also
without a statue. Persuasion is worshipped by them on the following
ground. Apollo and Artemis after slaying Pytho went to Ægialea to
purify themselves. But being seized with some panic fear in the place
which they now call Fear, they turned aside to Crete to Carmanor, and
a pestilence came upon the people at Ægialea, and they were ordered by
the seers to propitiate Apollo and Artemis. And they sent 7 lads and
7 maidens to the river Sythas to supplicate Apollo and Artemis, and
persuaded by them these deities went to what was then the citadel, and
the place they first reached was the temple of Persuasion. A Pageant
of all this goes on to this day. On the Festival of Apollo the lads
go to the river Sythas, and, after bringing Apollo and Artemis to the
temple of Persuasion, take them back again to the temple of Apollo. And
that temple is in the middle of the present market-place, and they say
it was originally built by Prœtus, because his daughters got cured of
madness here. They say also that Meleager hung up in this temple the
spear with which he killed the Calydonian boar: here too (they say) are
deposited the flutes of Marsyas: for after his awful death the river
Marsyas carried them to Mæander, and they turned up again at the Asopus
and were landed at Sicyon, and given to Apollo by a shepherd who found
them. Of these votive offerings there is no vestige: for they were
burnt with the temple. And the temple and statue were re-erected in my
time by Pythocles.




CHAPTER VIII.


The sacred enclosure near the temple of Persuasion, consecrated to
the Roman emperors, was formerly the house of Cleon the king. For
Clisthenes the son of Aristonymus, the son of Myro, was king of the
Sicyonians in the lower part of the city, but Cleon in what is now the
city (_i.e._ the upper part). In front of this house is a hero-chapel
to Aratus, who did the greatest exploits of all the Greeks in his
time: and this is what he did. After the death of Cleon there came
on those in authority such unbridled lust for power, that Euthydemus
and Timoclidas usurped the chief power. These the people afterwards
drove out, and put in their place Clinias the father of Aratus: and
not many years afterwards Abantidas got the chief power, (after the
death of Clinias), and either exiled Aratus, or Aratus retired of his
own free will. However the men of the country killed Abantidas, and
Pascas his father succeeded him, and Nicocles killed him, and reigned
in his room. Against him came Aratus with some Sicyonian refugees and
mercenaries from Argos, and slipping by some of the garrison in the
darkness (for he made his attack by night), and forcing others back,
got inside the walls: and (for by now it was day) leading his men to
the tyrant’s house, he made a fierce attack on it. And he took it by
storm with no great difficulty, and Nicocles slipt out at a back door
and fled. And Aratus granted the Sicyonians isonomy, reconciling them
to the refugees, and giving back to the refugees all their houses and
goods that had been sold, but not without full compensation to former
purchasers. And because all the Greeks were greatly afraid of the
Macedonians and Antigonus (the Regent for Philip the son of Demetrius),
he forced the Sicyonians, though they were Dorians, into the Achæan
league. And forthwith he was chosen commander in chief by the Achæans,
and he led them against the Locrians that live at Amphissa, and into
the territory of the hostile Ætolians, and ravaged it. And although
Antigonus held Corinth with a Macedonian garrison, he dismayed them by
the suddenness of his attack, and in a battle defeated and killed many
of them, and among others Persæus the head of the garrison, who had
been a disciple of Zeno (the son of Mnaseas) in philosophy. And when
Aratus had set Corinth free, then the Epidaurians and the Trœzenians
who occupy the coast of Argolis, and the Megarians beyond the Isthmus,
joined the Achæan league, and Ptolemy also formed an alliance with
them. But the Lacedæmonians and Agis (the son of Eudamidas) their king
were beforehand with them, and took Pellene by a _coup de main_, but
when Aratus and his army came up they were beaten in the engagement,
and evacuated Pellene, and returned home again on certain conditions.
And Aratus, as things had prospered so well in the Peloponnese, thought
it monstrous that the Piræus and Munychia, and moreover Salamis and
Sunium, should be allowed to continue in Macedonian hands, and, as he
did not expect to be able to take them by storm, he persuaded Diogenes,
who was Governor of these Forts, to surrender them for 150 talents, and
of this money he himself contributed one sixth part for the Athenians.
He also persuaded Aristomachus, who was king at Argos, to give a
democratical form of government to the Argives, and to join the Achæan
league. And he took Mantinea from the Lacedæmonians. But indeed all
things do not answer according to a man’s wish, since even Aratus was
obliged eventually to become the ally of the Macedonians and Antigonus.
This is how it happened.




CHAPTER IX.


Cleomenes, the son of Leonidas, and grandson of Cleonymus, when he
succeeded to the kingdom in Sparta, imitated Pausanias in desiring to
be an autocrat, and not to obey the established laws. And as he was
more impetuous than Pausanias, and brave as a lion, he quickly moulded
everything to his will by his sagacity and boldness, and took off by
poison Eurydamidas, the king of the other royal branch, while quite
a lad, and vested the power of the Ephors in his brother Epiclidas,
and having put down the power of the Senate, he established instead
of them The Great Council of Patronomi (as they were called). And
being very ambitious of greater fortunes, and even the supremacy over
Greece, he attacked the Achæans first, hoping to have them as allies if
he conquered them, and not wishing to give them the chance to hinder
his actions. And he attacked them and beat them at Dyme above Patræ,
Aratus being in this action the Achæan general, and this defeat it was
that compelled Aratus to invite the aid of Antigonus, being afraid
for the Achæans, and even for the safety of Sicyon. And Cleomenes
having violated his conditions with Antigonus, (having openly acted
against the terms of the treaty in other respects, and especially by
turning out the inhabitants of Megalopolis,) Antigonus crossed into
the Peloponnese, and in concert with the Achæans attacked Cleomenes at
Sellasia. And the Achæans were victorious, and Sellasia was enslaved,
and Lacedæmon captured. Antigonus and the Achæans then gave back to
the Lacedæmonians their old Polity: and of Leonidas’s sons, Epiclidas
was killed in battle, and Cleomenes, (who fled to Egypt and received
the greatest honours from Ptolemy), was cast into prison subsequently
for inciting the Egyptians to revolt. And he escaped out of prison,
and caused some trouble at Alexandria: but at last he was taken and
committed suicide. And the Lacedæmonians, glad to get rid of Cleomenes,
chose to submit to kingly government no longer, but from thenceforth
until now had the republican form of government. And Antigonus
continued friendly to Aratus, as he had done him many good and splendid
services. But when Philip took the government into his own hands,
because Aratus did not praise his frequent exhibition of temper to his
subjects, and sometimes even checked him in his outbursts, he murdered
him, giving him poison when he didn’t expect it. And from Ægium, for
here fate took him, they took his body to Sicyon and buried him, and
the hero-chapel Arateum is still called after him. And Philip acted in
just the same way to Euryclides and Micon, who were Athenians: for them
too, (being orators and not unpersuasive with the people), he took off
by poison. But poison was it seems destined to bring disaster to Philip
himself: for his son Demetrius was poisoned by Perseus, his youngest
brother, and so caused his father’s death by sorrow. And I have gone
out of my way to give this account, remembering the divine saying of
Hesiod, that he who plots mischief for another brings it first on his
own pate.[16]

  And next to the hero-chapel of Aratus is an altar to Poseidon
Isthmius, and rude statues of Milichian Zeus and Tutelary Artemis.
Milichian Zeus is in the shape of Pyramid, Artemis in that of a Pillar.
Here too has been built a Council Chamber, and a Porch called the
Clisthenic from its builder Clisthenes, who built it out of spoil which
he took in the war against Cirrha, as an ally of the Amphictyones.
And in the part of the market-place which is in the open air there is
a Zeus in brass, the work of Lysippus, and near it a golden Artemis.
And next is the temple of Lycian (_Wolf-god_) Apollo, in a very
dilapidated condition. When wolves used to devour the flocks so that
there was no profit in keeping sheep, Apollo pointed out a certain
place where some dry wood lay, and ordered the bark of this wood and
flesh to be laid together before the wolves. And this bark killed the
wolves immediately they tasted it. This wood is kept stored up in the
temple of the Wolf-god: but what tree it is of none of the Sicyonian
antiquaries know. And next are some brazen statues, said to be the
daughters of Prœtus, but the inscription has other women’s names. There
is also a Hercules in brass, by Sicyonian Lysippus. And near it is a
statue of Hermes of the Market.




CHAPTER X.


Not far from the market-place in the gymnasium is a Hercules in stone,
the work of Scopas. There is also elsewhere a temple of Hercules: the
precincts of which they call Pædize, and the temple is in the middle of
the precincts, and in it is an old wooden statue of Hercules by Laphaes
of Phlius. And the sacrifices they are wont to conduct as follows.
They say that Phæstus, when he went to Sicyon, found that the people
there offered victims to Hercules as a hero, whereas he thought they
ought to sacrifice to him as to a god. And now the Sicyonians sacrifice
lambs and burn their thighs on the altar, and part of the meat they
eat and part they offer as to a hero. And the first of the days of the
Feast which they keep to Hercules they call _Names_, and the second
_Hercules’ Day_.

  A road leads from here to the temple of Æsculapius. In the precincts
there is on the left hand a double building: in the outer room is a
statue of _Sleep_, and there is nothing of it remaining but the head.
And the inner room is dedicated to Carnean Apollo, and none but the
priests may enter it. In the Porch is the huge bone of a sea-monster,
and next it the statue of _Dream_, and _Sleep_, called _the Bountiful_,
lulling a lion to rest. And as you go up to the temple of Æsculapius,
on one side is a statue of Pan seated, on the other one of Artemis
erect. At the entrance is the god himself (Æsculapius) beardless, in
gold and ivory, the work of Calamis: he has his sceptre in one hand,
and in the other the fruit of the pine-tree. And they say that the god
was brought to them from Epidaurus by a pair of mules, and that he was
like a dragon, and that he was brought by Nicagora a native of Sicyon,
the mother of Agasicles, and the wife of Echetimus. There are also some
small statues fastened to the ceiling. The woman seated on the dragon
is they say Aristodama the mother of Aratus, and they consider Aratus
the son of Æsculapius. Such are the notable things to be seen in these
precincts.

  And there are other precincts there sacred to Aphrodite: and in them
first is the statue of Antiope. For they say her sons were born at
Sicyon, and this is the connection with Antiope. Next is the temple
of Aphrodite. None may enter into it but a maiden Sacristan, who must
never marry, and another maiden who performs the annual rites. This
maiden they call bath-carrier. All others alike must only look at the
goddess from the porch and worship her there. Her figure seated is the
design of Canachus a native of Sicyon, (who also designed the Didymæan
Apollo for the Milesians, and the Ismenian Apollo for the Thebans). It
is in gold and ivory. The goddess wears on her head a cap, and in one
hand holds a poppy, in the other an apple. And they offer in sacrifice
to her the thighs of any victims but wild boars, all other parts they
burn with juniper wood, and when they burn the thighs they burn up
together with them the leaves of pæderos; which is a plant that grows
in the precincts of the goddess’ temple in the open air, and grows in
no other land, nor in any other part of Sicyonia. And its leaves are
smaller than the leaves of the beech, but larger than those of the holm
oak, and their shape is that of the oak-leaf, partly black, partly
white like the silvery white of the poplar tree.

  And as you go hence to the gymnasium, on the right is the temple of
Pheræan Artemis: the wooden statue of the goddess was they say brought
from Pheræ. Clinias built this gymnasium, and they educate boys there
still. There is an Artemis also in white stone, carved only down to the
waist, and a Hercules in his lower parts like the square Hermæ.




CHAPTER XI.


And as you turn from thence to the gate called The Holy Gate, not far
from the gate is a shrine of Athene, which Epopeus formerly erected,
in size and beauty surpassing those of its time. But time has obscured
its fame. The god struck it with lightning: and now there remains only
the altar, for the lightning did not light on it. And in front of
the altar is the tomb of Epopeus, and near his tomb are the Gods the
Averters of Evil, to whom they sacrifice (as the Greeks generally) to
avert evil. And they say that Epopeus built the neighbouring temple to
Artemis and Apollo, and Adrastus the one next to Hera: but no statues
remain in either temple. Adrastus also built behind the temple of
Hera two altars, one to Pan, and one to the Sun God in white stone.
And as you descend to the plain is a temple of Demeter, and they say
Plemnæus built it in gratitude to the goddess for rearing his son. And
at a little distance from the temple of Hera, which Adrastus built, is
the temple of Carnean Apollo. There are only the pillars of it left,
you will find neither walls nor roof nor anything else there--nor in
the temple of Hera the _Guide_: which was built by Phalces the son
of Temenus, who said that Hera was his guide on the way to Sicyon.
And as you go from Sicyon on the straight road to Phlius, about ten
stades, and then turn off to the left, is the grove called Pyræa, and
in it a temple of Demeter Prostasia, and Proserpine. Here the men have
a festival to themselves, and give up what is called the _Nymphon_
to the women to celebrate their festival in, and there are statues
of Dionysus and Demeter and Proserpine (showing only their faces) in
the _Nymphon_. And the road to Titane is sixty stades, and because of
its narrowness it is impassable by a carriage and pair: and 20 stades
further you cross the Asopus, and see on the left a grove of holm-oaks,
and a temple of the Goddesses whom the Athenians call the Venerable,
but the Sicyonians the Eumenides. And every year they keep a feast to
them on one day, sacrificing ewes big with young, and they are wont
to pour libations of honey and milk, and to use flowers as chaplets.
They go through the same rites on the altar of the Fates in the open
air, in the grove. And as you turn back again to the road, and cross
the Asopus again, you come to a mountain-top, where the natives say
Titan first dwelt, who was the brother of the Sun, and gave the name
Titane to this place. This Titan seems to me to have been wonderfully
clever in watching the seasons of the year, as when the Sun fructified
and ripened seeds and fruit, and this was why he was considered the
Sun’s brother. And afterwards Alexanor, the son of Machaon, the son of
Æsculapius, came to Sicyon, and built a temple of Æsculapius at Titane.
A few people dwell there, but for the most part only the suppliants of
the god, and there are within the precincts some old cypress trees. But
it is not possible to learn of what wood or metal Æsculapius’ statue is
made, nor do they know who made it, though some say Alexanor himself.
The only parts of the statue that are visible are the face and fingers
and toes, for a white woollen tunic and cloak are thrown round it. And
there is a statue of Hygiea somewhat similar. You can not see it either
easily, so hidden is it by the hair of the women which they shear to
the goddess, and by the folds of a Babylonish garment. And whichever of
these any one wishes to propitiate, he is instructed to worship Hygiea.
Alexanor and Euamerion have also statues, to the former they offer
sacrifices after sunset as to a hero, but to the latter they sacrifice
as to a god. And (if my conjecture is correct) this Euamerion is called
Telesphorus (according to some oracle) by the people of Pergamum, but
by the people of Epidaurus Acesis. There is also a wooden statue of
Coronis, but not anywhere in the temple: but when bull or lamb or pig
are sacrificed to the goddess, then they take Coronis to the temple of
Athene and honour her there. Nor are they contented merely with cutting
off the thighs of the victims, but they burn all the victims whole
on the ground except birds, and these they burn on the altar. On the
gable ends are figures of Hercules, and several Victories. And in the
porch are statues of Dionysus and Hecate and Aphrodite and The Mother
of the Gods and Fortune: these are all in wood, and one of Gortynian
Æsculapius in stone. And people are afraid to approach the sacred
dragons: but if their food is put at the entrance they give no further
trouble. There is also within the precincts a statue of Granianus, a
native of Sicyon, in brass. He won two victories at Olympia in the
pentathlum, and a third in the stadium, and two in the double course,
which he ran both in armour and out of armour.




CHAPTER XII.


And at Titane there is also a temple of Athene, into which they carry
the statue of Coronis. And in it is an old wooden statue of Athene.
This too is said to have been struck by lightning. As you descend from
the hill, for the temple is built on the hill, is the altar of the
winds, on which the priest sacrifices to them one night in every year.
And he performs mysterious rites at four pits, to tame their violence,
chanting, so they say, the incantations of Medea.

  And as you go from Titane to Sicyon, and descend towards the sea,
there is on the left a temple of Hera, with neither statue nor roof.
They say Prœtus the son of Abas built it. And as you go down to what
is called the harbour of the Sicyonians, and turn to Aristonautæ, the
port of the people of Pellene, there is, a little above the road, on
the left a temple of Poseidon. And as you go on along the high road
you come to the river Helisson, and next the river Sythas, both rivers
flowing into the sea.

  Next to Sicyonia is Phliasia. Its chief town Phlius is 40 stades at
most distant from Titane, and the road to it from Sicyon is straight.
That the Phliasians have no connection with the Arcadians is plain
from the catalogue of the Arcadians in Homer’s Iliad, for they are
not included among them. And that they were Argives originally, and
became Dorians after the return of the Heraclidæ to the Peloponnese,
will appear in the course of my narrative. As I know there are many
different traditions about among the Phliasians, I shall give those
which are most generally accepted among them. The first person who
lived in this land was they say Aras an Autochthon, and he built a
city on that hill which is still in our time called the Arantine hill,
(not very far from another hill, on which the Phliasians have their
citadel and a temple of Hebe.) Here he built his city, and from him
both land and city got called of old Arantia. It was in his reign that
Asopus (said to be the son of Celusa and Poseidon) found the water of
the river which they still call Asopus from the name of the person who
found it.[17] And the sepulchre of Aras is in a place called Celeæ,
where they say also Dysaules, an Eleusinian, is buried. And Aras had a
son Aoris and a daughter Aræthyrea, who the Phliasians say were cunning
hunters and brave in war. And, Aræthyrea dying first, Aoris changed the
name of the city into Aræthyrea. Homer has made mention of it (when
recording those who went with Agamemnon to Ilium) in the line

    “They lived at Orneæ and lovely Aræthyrea.”[18]

And I think the tombs of the sons of Aras are on the Arantine hill. And
at their tombs are some remarkable pillars, and before the rites which
they celebrate to Ceres they look at these tombs, and call Aras and his
sons to the libations. As to Phlias, the third who gave his name to
the land, I cannot at all accept the Argive tradition that he was the
son of Cisus the son of Temenus, for I know that he was called the son
of Dionysus, and was said to have been one of those who sailed in the
Argo. And the lines of the Rhodian poet bear me out, “Phlias also came
with the men of Aræthyrea, where he dwelt, wealthy through his sire
Dionysus, near the springs of Asopus.” And Aræthyrea was the mother of
Phlias and not Chthonophyle, for Chthonophyle was his wife and he had
Andromedas by her.




CHAPTER XIII.


By the return of the Heraclidæ all the Peloponnese was disturbed
except Arcadia, for many of the cities had to take Dorian settlers,
and frequent changes of inhabitants took place. The following were
the changes at Phlius. Rhegnidas a Dorian (the son of Phalces the son
of Temenus) marched against it from Argos and Sicyon. And some of the
Phliasians were content with his demands, that they should remain in
their own land, that he should be their king, and that the Dorians and
he should have lands assigned to them. But Hippasus and his party stood
out for a vigorous defence, and not for yielding up to the Dorians
their numerous advantages without a fight. But as the people preferred
the opposite view, Hippasus and those who agreed with him fled to
Samos. And the great grandson of this Hippasus was Pythagoras, surnamed
the Wise: who was the son of Mnesarchus, the son of Euphron, the son of
Hippasus. This is the account the Phliasians give of their own history,
and in most particulars the Sicyonians bear them out.

  The most notable public sights are as follows. There is in the
citadel at Phlius a cypress grove, and a temple hoary from old
antiquity. The deity to whom the temple belongs is said by the most
ancient of the Phliasians to have been Ganymeda, but by later ones
Hebe: of whom Homer has made mention in the single combat between
Menelaus and Paris, saying that she was the cupbearer of the gods, and
again in the descent of Odysseus to Hades he has said that she was
the wife of Hercules. But Olen in his Hymn to Hera says that she was
reared by the Seasons, and was mother of Ares and Hebe. And among the
Phliasians this goddess has various honours and especially in regard to
slaves; for they give them entire immunity if they come as suppliants
here, and when prisoners are loosed of their fetters they hang them up
on the trees in the grove. And they keep a yearly feast which they
call _Ivy-cuttings_. But they have no statue in any secret crypt, nor
do they display one openly: and they have a sacred reason for acting
so, for on the left as you go out there is a temple of Hera with a
statue in Parian marble. And in the citadel there are some precincts
sacred to Demeter, and in them a temple and statue of Demeter and
Persephone, and also a brazen statue of Artemis, which seemed to me
ancient. And as you go down from the citadel there is on the right
a temple and beardless statue of Æsculapius. Under this temple is a
theatre. And not far from it is a temple of Demeter, and some old
statues of the goddess in a sitting posture.

  And in the market-place there is a brazen she-goat, mostly gilt.
It got honours among the Phliasians for the following reason. The
constellation which they call the She-Goat does continuous harm to
vines at its rise. And that no serious detriment might result from it,
they paid various honours to this brazen goat, and decked its statue
with gold. Here too is a monument of Aristias the son of Pratinas. The
Satyrs carved by Aristias and Pratinas are reckoned the best carving
next to that of Æschylus. In the back part of the market-place is a
house called by the Phliasians the seer’s house. Into it Amphiaraus
went (so they say) and lay all night in sleep before giving his
oracular responses: and according to their account he for some time
lived there privately and not as a seer. And since his time the
building has been shut up entirely. And not far off is what is called
_Omphalus_, the centre of all the Peloponnese, if indeed their account
is correct. Next you come to an ancient temple of Dionysus, and another
of Apollo, and another of Isis. The statue of Dionysus may be seen by
anybody, as also that of Apollo: but that of Isis may only be seen
by the priests. The following is also a tradition of the Phliasians,
that Hercules, when he returned safe from Libya with the apples of the
Hesperides, went to Phlius for some reason or other, and when he was
living there was visited by Œneus, who was a connexion by marriage.
On his arrival from Ætolia either he feasted Hercules, or Hercules
feasted him. However this may be, Hercules struck the lad Cyathus, the
cupbearer of Œneus, on the head with one of his fingers, not being
pleased with the drink he offered him: and as this lad died immediately
from the blow, the Phliasians erected a chapel to his memory. It was
built near the temple of Apollo, and has a stone statue of Cyathus in
the act of handing the cup to Hercules.




CHAPTER XIV.


Now Celeæ is about five stades from Phlius, and they sacrifice to
Demeter there every fourth year and not annually. Nor is the presiding
priest appointed for life, but a different one is chosen on each
occasion, who may marry if he chooses. In this respect they differ from
the Eleusinian mysteries, though generally speaking, as the Phliasians
themselves admit, their mysteries are an imitation of those. They
say that Dysaules the brother of Celeus came to their country and
established these rites, when he was driven from Eleusis by Ion the son
of Xuthus, who had been chosen commander in chief by the Athenians in
the war against the people of Eleusis. This statement of the Phliasians
I cannot assent to, that an Eleusinian should have been conquered in
battle and gone into exile, when before the war was fought out the
matter was submitted to arbitration, and Eumolpus remained at Eleusis.
But it is quite possible that Dysaules may have gone to Celeæ for some
other reason, and not that which the Phliasians allege. Nor indeed
had he, as it seems to me, any other relation with the Eleusinian
chiefs than as brother of Celeus, for else Homer would not have passed
him over in his Hymn to Demeter: where in his list of those who were
taught the mysteries by the goddess he ignores Dysaules. These are
his lines. “She shewed Triptolemus, and Diocles tamer of horses, and
powerful Eumolpus, and Celeus leader of the people, the due performance
of her rights and mysteries.”[19] However, according to the Phliasian
tradition, this Dysaules established the mysteries here, and also gave
the name Celeæ to the place. There is also here as I have said the
tomb of Dysaules, but subsequent to the date of the tomb of Aras: for
according to the Phliasian account Dysaules came after the days when
Aras was king. For they say Aras was a contemporary of Prometheus the
son of Iapetus, and lived three generations earlier than Pelasgus the
son of Arcas, and those who were called the Autochthons at Athens. And
they say the chariot of Pelops is attached to the roof of the temple
called the Anactorum. Such are the most important traditions of the
Phliasians.




CHAPTER XV.


On the road from Corinth to Argos you come to the small town of Cleonæ.
Some say Cleone was the daughter of Pelops, others that she was one of
the daughters of Asopus, the river that flows by Sicyon: however the
town got its name from her. There is a temple of Athene there, and a
statue of the goddess by Scyllis and Dipœnus, pupils of Dædalus. But
some say that Dædalus took a wife from Gortyns, and that Dipœnus and
Scyllis were his sons by her. At Cleonæ beside this temple is the tomb
of Eurytus and Cteatus, who had gone from Elis to be spectators of the
Isthmian games, and whom Hercules shot with arrows there, charging them
with having fought against him in the battle with Augeas.

  From Cleonæ there are two roads to Argos, one convenient for rapid
walkers and the shorter route, the other called Tretus (_Bored_), more
convenient for a carriage, though it too is narrow and has mountains on
both sides. Among these mountains is still shown the lair of the Nemean
lion, for Nemea is only about 15 stades distant.

  At Nemea is a temple well worth seeing of Nemean Zeus, only the roof
has tumbled in, and there is no longer any statue there: but there is
a cypress grove near the temple, where they say that Opheltes, placed
on the grass there by his nurse, was devoured by a dragon. The Argives
also sacrifice to Zeus at Nemea, and select the priest of Nemean
Zeus, and have a contest in running for men in armour at the winter
meeting at Nemea. Here too is the tomb of Opheltes, and round it a
wall of stones, and altars within the precincts: and there is a piled
up mound of earth as a monument to Lycurgus the father of Opheltes.
And the fountain they call Adrastea, whether for some other reason or
because Adrastus discovered it. And they say the name Nemea was given
to the place by Nemea the daughter of Asopus. And above Nemea is the
Mountain Apesas, where they say Perseus sacrificed first to Apesantian
Zeus. And as you go up to Argos by the road called Tretus you will see
on the left hand the ruins of Mycenæ. All Greeks know that Perseus
founded Mycenæ, and I shall relate the circumstances of the founding,
and why the Argives afterwards dispossessed the old inhabitants. For
in what is now called Argolis they mention no older town, and they say
that Inachus the king gave his name to the river, and sacrificed to
Hera. They also say that Phoroneus was the first mortal in this land,
and that Inachus his father was not a man but a river: and that he
and Cephisus and Asterion were the arbitrators between Poseidon and
Hera in their dispute about the land: and when they judged that it was
Hera’s, then Poseidon took away all their water. And this is the reason
why neither Inachus nor any other of these rivers mentioned have any
water except after rain. And in summer their streams are dry except at
Lerna. And Phoroneus the son of Inachus first gathered men together in
communities, who before lived scattered and solitary: so the city in
which they were first gathered together was called Phoronicum.




CHAPTER XVI.


And Argos his daughter’s son, who reigned after Phoroneus, gave Argos
his own name. And to Argos were born Pirasus and Phorbas, and to
Phorbas Triopas, and to Triopas Iasus and Agenor. Io the daughter of
Iasus went to Egypt, either as Herodotus tells the story or as the
Greeks tell the story, and Crotopus the son of Agenor had the rule
after Iasus, and the son of Crotopus was Sthenelas. And Danaus sailed
from Egypt against Gelanor the son of Sthenelas, and expelled from the
kingdom the descendants of Agenor. All the world knows the history, how
his daughters acted to their cousins, and how after his death Lynceus
had the kingdom. And his grandsons, the sons of Abas, divided the
kingdom, Acrisius remained at Argos, and Prœtus had Heræum and Midea
and Tiryns and all the maritime parts of Argolis: and there are to
this day remains of Prœtus’ palace at Tiryns. And some time afterwards
Acrisius, hearing that Perseus was alive and a mighty man of valour,
retired to Larissa by the river Peneus. And Perseus, as he wished
excessively to see his mother’s father and greet him with kind words
and deeds, went to him to Larissa. And being in the prime of life,
and rejoicing in the invention of the game of quoits, he displayed
his prowess to all, and by fatality Acrisius was unintentionally
killed by the throw of his quoit. Thus was the prophecy of the god
fulfilled to Acrisius, nor did his contrivances against his daughter
and her son turn away his fate. But when Perseus returned to Argos,
for he was ashamed of the infamy of this murder of his grandfather,
he persuaded Megapenthes the son of Prœtus to exchange kingdoms with
him, and founded Mycenæ, where the scabbard of his sword fell off,
for he thought this an indication that he should build a city there.
Another tradition is that when thirsty he took up a fungus from the
ground, and when some water flowed from it he drank it and was pleased,
and called the name of the place Mycenæ [which means both _scabbard_
and _fungus_.] Homer indeed in the Odyssey[20] has recorded the lady
Mycene in the following line,

    “Tyro and Alcmene and Mycene adorned with garlands;”

and the poem called the Great Eœæ, by Hesiod, represents her as the
daughter of Inachus and the wife of Arestor: and from her some say the
city got its name. But the tradition of Acusilaus which they also add,
that Myceneus was the son of Sparton, and Sparton the son of Phoroneus,
I could not accept, far less would the Lacedæmonians. For they have
at Amyclæ the image of a woman called Sparta, and if they heard that
Sparton was the son of Phoroneus they would marvel at once.

  Now the Argives destroyed Mycenæ in jealousy. For though they took no
part against the Medes, the people of Mycenæ sent to Thermopylæ 80 men,
who shared in the glory of the famous 300. This public spirit brought
about their destruction, by provoking the Argives to jealousy. But
there are still some remains of the precincts and the gate, and there
are some lions on it: which were they say executed by the Cyclopes, who
built the wall at Tiryns for Prœtus. And among the ruins at Mycenæ is a
fountain called Perseus’, and some underground buildings belonging to
Atreus and his sons, where their treasures were. And there is the tomb
of Atreus, and of those whom Ægisthus slew at a banquet on their return
from Ilium with Agamemnon. As to Cassandra’s tomb the Lacedæmonians
of Amyclæ claim that they have it. And there is the tomb of Agamemnon
there, and that of Eurymedon the charioteer, and the joint-tomb of
Teledamus and Pelops, who were twins of Cassandra, and were butchered
by Ægisthus (while still babes) after their parents. There is also the
tomb of Electra, who married Pylades, and Orestes gave her away. And
Hellanicus has recorded that Medon and Strophius were the issue of the
marriage. And Clytæmnestra and Ægisthus were buried a little outside
the walls, for they were thought unworthy to lie within the city, and
mingle their ashes with Agamemnon and those who were murdered with him.




CHAPTER XVII.


About fifteen stades from Mycenæ on the left is a temple of Hera. By
the road flows the river Eleutherius. And the priestesses use it for
lustrations and for private sacrifices. And this temple is on the
more level part of Eubœa, for Eubœa is a mountain, and they say the
daughters of the river god Asterion were Eubœa and Prosymna and Acræa,
and that they were nurses of Hera. And Acræa gave her name to all the
mountain opposite the temple of Hera, and Eubœa to the mountain near
the temple, and Prosymna to the ground below the temple. And this
Asterion flows above the temple of Hera and falls into a ravine and so
disappears. And the flower called Asterion grows on its banks: they
carry this flower to Hera and plait her crowns of its leaves. The
architect of the temple was they say Eupolemus the Argive: and all the
carved work above the pillars relates partly to the birth of Zeus and
the gods and the battle with the Giants, and partly to the Trojan war
and the capture of Ilium. And there are some statues in the porch, of
the priestesses of Hera, and of Orestes and other heroes. For they
say the one bearing the inscription that it is the Emperor Augustus
is really Orestes. In the Ante-chapel are some old statues of The
Graces, and on the right hand the bed of Hera, and a votive offering,
the spear which Menelaus took from Euphorbus at Ilium. And there is a
huge statue of Hera seated on a throne, in gold and ivory, the design
of Polycletus. And she has a crown on her head composed of Graces and
Seasons, and in one hand she has the fruit of the pomegranate, and in
the other her sceptre. As to the pomegranate let me pass that over,
for I am forbid to speak of it. But as to the cuckoo which sits on
the sceptre, they say that Zeus, when he was enamoured of Hera while
still a maid, changed himself into that bird, and that Hera chased the
supposed cuckoo in sport. This tradition and similar ones about the
gods I do not record because I believe them, but I record them just
the same. And near Hera is a statue of Hebe said to be by Naucydes,
this too in ivory and gold. And near it on a pillar is an old statue
of Hera. But the oldest statue of Hera was made of wild pear tree,
and was placed at Tiryns by Pirasus the son of Argus, and the Argives
when they took Tiryns conveyed it to the temple of Hera, and I myself
have seen it, a statue not very large seated. And the votive offerings
worthy of record are a silver altar, with the legendary marriage of
Hebe and Hercules carved upon it, and a peacock of gold and precious
stones, an offering of the Emperor Adrian: he made this present because
the peacock is sacred to Hera. There is also a golden crown and purple
robe, the offerings of Nero. And there are above this temple the
foundations of an older one and whatever the flames have spared. That
temple was burnt by Chryseis, the priestess of Hera, falling asleep,
and her lamp first setting fire to the decorations. And Chryseis went
to Tegea and supplicated Alean Athene: and the Argives, although such
a misfortune had befallen them, did not remove the effigy of Chryseis,
but it is there to this day in front of the burnt temple.




CHAPTER XVIII.


And as you go from Mycenæ to Argos there is on the left hand a
hero-chapel of Perseus near the road. He has honours here from the
people in the neighbourhood, but the greatest honours are paid him
at Seriphus, and he has also a temple among the Athenians, and in
it an altar to Dictys and Clymene, who are called the Saviours of
Perseus. And as you advance on the road to Argos a little way from this
hero-chapel is the tomb of Thyestes on the right hand: and on it is
a ram in stone, for Thyestes stole the golden sheep, when he seduced
his brother’s wife. And Atreus could not be satisfied with the law
of Tit for Tat, but slaughtered the children of Thyestes and served
them up to him at table. But afterwards I cannot pronounce decidedly
whether Ægisthus began the injury, or whether it began with the murder
of Tantalus the son of Thyestes by Agamemnon: for they say he married
Clytæmnestra as her first husband having received her from Tyndareus.
And I do not wish to accuse them of wickedness incarnate. But if
the crime of Pelops and the ghost of Myrtilus haunted the family so
ruthlessly, it reminds one of the answer of the Pythian Priestess to
Glaucus the son of Epicydes the Spartan, when he purposed perjury, that
punishment would come on his descendants.

  As you go on a little to the left from the _Rams_, for so they call
the tomb of Thyestes, is a place called Mysia, and a temple of Mysian
Demeter, so called from a man called Mysius, who was as the Argives
say a host of Demeter. It has no roof. And in it is a shrine of baked
brick, and images of Proserpine and Pluto and Demeter. And a little
further is the river Inachus, and on the other side of the river is an
altar of the Sun. And you will go thence to the gate called from the
neighbouring temple, the temple of Ilithyia.

  The Argives are the only Greeks I know of who were divided into three
kingdoms. For in the reign of Anaxagoras, the son of Argos, the son of
Megapenthes, a madness came on the women, they went from their homes
and wandered up and down the country, till Melampus the son of Amythaon
cured them of that complaint, on condition that he and his brother
Bias should share alike with Anaxagoras. And five kings of Bias’ race
reigned for four generations to Cyanippus the son of Ægialeus, being
all descended from Neleus on the mother’s side, and from Melampus six
generations and six kings to Amphilochus the son of Amphiaraus. But
the native race, the descendants of Anaxagoras, reigned longer. For
Iphis, the son of Alector, the son of Anaxagoras, left the kingdom to
Sthenelus the son of his brother Capaneus: and Amphilochus after the
capture of Ilium having migrated to what is now called Amphilochi,
and Cyanippus dying childless, Cylarabes the son of Sthenelus had the
kingdom alone. And he too had no children, and so Orestes the son
of Agamemnon got Argos, as he was a near neighbour, and besides his
hereditary sway had added to his dominions much Arcadian territory, and
as he had also got the kingdom in Sparta, and had ever ready help in
the alliance of the Phocians. And he was king of the Lacedæmonians at
their own request. For they thought the sons of Tyndareus’ daughters
better entitled to the kingdom than Nicostratus and Megapenthes, the
sons of Menelaus by a bondmaid. And when Orestes died Tisamenus,
the son of Orestes by Hermione the daughter of Menelaus, had the
kingdom. And Penthilus, Orestes’ bastard son by Erigone the daughter
of Ægisthus, is mentioned by Cinæthon in his Verses. It was in the
reign of this Tisamenus that the Heraclidæ returned to the Peloponnese,
_viz._ Temenus and Cresphontes the sons of Aristomachus, and, as
Aristodemus had died earlier, his sons came too. And they laid claim
to Argos and its kingdom on it seems to me the justest grounds, for
Tisamenus was a descendant of Pelops, but the Heraclidæ derived from
Perseus. And they represented that Tyndareus had been turned out by
Hippocoon, and they said that Hercules had slain Hippocoon and his
sons, and had given the country back to Tyndareus. Similarly they said
about Messenia, that it was given to Nestor as a charge by Hercules
when he took Pylos. They turned out therefore Tisamenus from Lacedæmon
and Argos, and the descendants of Nestor from Messenia, _viz._ Alcmæon
the son of Sillus the son of Thrasymedes, and Pisistratus the son of
Pisistratus, and the sons of Pæon the son of Antilochus, and besides
them Melanthus the son of Andropompus, the son of Borus, the son of
Penthilus, the son of Periclymenus. So Tisamenus and his sons went to
what is now called Achaia with his army: and all the other sons of
Neleus but Pisistratus, (for I don’t know to what people he betook
himself), went to Athens, and the Pæonidæ and the Alcmæonidæ were
called after them. Melanthus also had the kingdom, after driving out
Thymœtes, the son of Oxyntas, who was the last of the descendants of
Theseus that reigned at Athens.




CHAPTER XIX.


As to Cresphontes and the sons of Aristodemus there is nothing pressing
to narrate about them. But Temenus openly made use of Deiphontes (the
son of Antimachus, the son of Thrasyanor, the son of Ctesippus, the
son of Hercules) as general for his battles instead of his sons, and
made him his associate in all things, and gave him as wife his daughter
Hyrnetho whom he loved more than all his children, and was suspected of
intending to make her and Deiphontes his heirs in the kingdom. And for
these reasons he was slain by his sons, and Cisus the eldest of them
became king. But the Argives, who had from the most ancient times loved
equality and home rule, reduced the kingly power so low, that Medon,
the son of Cisus, and his descendants were left the royal title only.
And Meltas the son of Lacedas, the 10th descendant of Medon, the people
sentenced to deprivation of his kingdom altogether.

  Of the temples in the city of the Argives the most notable is that
of Lycian (_Wolf-God_) Apollo. The statue in our day was the work of
an Athenian, Attalus, but originally the temple and wooden statue was
the offering of Danaus. I think all statues were wooden in those days,
and especially Egyptian ones. Now Danaus built a temple to Apollo
the Wolf-God for the following reason. When he came to Argos, he and
Gelanor the son of Sthenelas were rival competitors for the kingdom.
And many ingratiating words having been spoken by both of them to the
people, and Gelanor’s speech seeming rather the best, the people, they
say, put off the decision to the next day. And at break of day a wolf
attacked a herd of cattle that were feeding near the walls, and had a
fierce encounter with the bull, the leader of the herd. And it occurred
to the Argives that Gelanor was like the bull, Danaus like the wolf,
for just as this animal does not live with human beings so Danaus had
not up to that time lived with them. And as the wolf mastered the bull,
so Danaus got the kingdom. And he thinking that Apollo had sent that
wolf against the herd, built a temple to Apollo the Wolf-God. In it
is the throne of Danaus, and an image of Biton, the man who carried
a bull on his shoulders (as Lyceas has represented), for, when the
Argives were sacrificing to Zeus at Nemea, Biton took up a bull by
sheer strength and carried it to the altar. And they light the fire
close to this image, and they call it the fire of Phoroneus: for they
do not admit that Prometheus gave fire to men, but they attribute
the invention of fire to Phoroneus. Here also are wooden statues of
Aphrodite and Hermes, the latter the work of Epeus, and the former
the offering of Hypermnestra. For she, the only one of his daughters
who disobeyed his cruel order, was brought to trial by Danaus, partly
because he thought his own safety compromised by that of Lynceus, and
partly because her not joining with her sisters in their atrocious
deed augmented the disgrace of the contriver of the deed. And, being
acquitted by the Argives, she erected as a votive offering in this
temple a statue of Victorious Aphrodite. And there is inside the temple
a statue of Ladas, who excelled all his contemporaries in fleetness of
foot, and one of Hermes making a lyre out of a tortoise. And there is
in front of the temple an amphitheatre with a representation of the
fight between the bull and the wolf, and a maiden throwing a stone at
the bull. They think this maiden represents Artemis. Danaus had all
this constructed, and some pillars near, and wooden statues of Zeus and
Artemis.

  Here also are the tombs of Linus the son of Apollo, and of Psamathe
the daughter of Crotopus, and this is that Linus they say who wrote
poetry. I pass him by now as more meet to be discussed in another
place, and as regards Psamathe I have already given a full account of
her in what I have written about Megara. Next is a statue of Apollo the
Guardian of the Streets, and the altar of Rainy Zeus, where those who
conspired the return of Polynices to Thebes swore that they would die
if unsuccessful in taking Thebes. As to the sepulchre of Prometheus,
the Argives seem to me to give a less credible account than the
Opuntians, but they stick to their account all the same.




CHAPTER XX.


And passing by the effigy of Creux the boxer, and the trophy erected
over the Corinthians, you come to the statue of Milichian Zeus seated,
the work of Polycletus in white stone. I ascertained that the following
was the reason why it was made. When the Lacedæmonians began the war
with the Argives, they continued hostilities till Philip the son of
Amyntas compelled them to remain within their original boundaries. For
during all previous time the Lacedæmonians never interfered outside
the Peloponnese, but were always cutting a slice off Argolis, or the
Argives, if the Lacedæmonians were engaged in war, would at such a
time make a swoop on their borders. And when their mutual animosity
was at its height, the Argives resolved to keep a standing army of
1000 picked men, and their captain was Bryas the Argive, who in other
respects was insolent to the people, and outraged a maiden, who was
being led in procession to her bridegroom’s house, tearing her away
from her escort. But during the night catching him asleep she blinded
Bryas: and being arrested at daybreak implored protection from the
people. As they would not abandon her to the vengeance of the thousand,
there ensued a fight, and the people were victorious, and in the heat
of victory left not one of the 1000 alive. But afterwards they made
expiation for this shedding of kinsmen’s blood, and erected a statue
to Milichian Zeus. And near are statues in stone of Cleobis and Bito,
who themselves drew the car with their mother in it to the temple of
Hera.[21] And opposite these is the temple of Nemean Zeus, and in it a
brazen statue of the god erect, the design of Lysippus. And next to it,
as you go forward, on the right hand, is the tomb of Phoroneus: to whom
they still offer victims. And opposite the temple of Nemean Zeus is a
temple of Fortune of most ancient date, since Palamedes the inventor of
dice made a votive offering of his dice to this temple. And the tomb
near they call that of the Mænad Chorea, who they say with the other
women accompanied Dionysus to Argos, and Perseus being victorious in
the battle slew most of the women: the others they buried all together,
but for her they had a tomb separately, as she excelled the others in
merit. And at a little distance is a temple of the Seasons. And as
you go on there are some full-length statues of Polynices, the son
of Œdipus, and all the chief warriors that died with him in battle
fighting against Thebes. These men Æschylus has described as only
seven in number, though more must have come from Argos and Messene
and Arcadia. And near these seven, (for the Argives also follow the
description of Æschylus), are the statues of those that took Thebes,
Ægialeus the son of Adrastus, and Promachus the son of Parthenopæus the
son of Talaus, and Polydorus the son of Hippomedon, and Thersander,
and Alcmæon and Amphilochus the sons of Amphiaraus, and Diomede and
Sthenelus: also Euryalus the son of Mecisteus, and Adrastus and Timeas,
the sons of Polynices. And not far from these statues is exhibited the
sepulchre of Danaus, and a cenotaph of the Argives whom fate seized in
Ilium or on the journey home. And there is here also a temple of Zeus
Soter, at a little distance from which is a building where the Argive
women bewail Adonis. And on the right hand of the entrance a temple has
been built to the river Cephisus: the water of this river they say was
not altogether dried up by Poseidon, but flowed under ground on the
site of the temple. And near the temple of the Cephisus is a head of
the Medusa in stone: this also they say is the work of the Cyclopes.
And the place behind they call to this day _Judgement Hall_, because
they say that Hypermnestra was put upon her trial there by Danaus. And
not far distant is a theatre: and in it among other things well worth
seeing is Perilaus the Argive, the son of Alcenor, slaying Othryades
the Spartan. Perilaus before this had had the good luck to carry off
the prize for wrestling in the Nemean games. And beyond the theatre
is a temple of Aphrodite, in front of which is a statue of Telesilla
the poetess on a pillar: at her feet lie her volumes of poetry, and
she herself is looking at a helmet, which she holds in her hand and
is about to put on her head. This Telesilla was otherwise remarkable
among women, besides being honoured for her poetic gifts. For when upon
the Argives fell disaster untold at the hands of Cleomenes (the son
of Anaxandrides) and the Lacedæmonians, and most of them perished in
the battle, and when all that fled for refuge to the grove at Argos
perished also, at first coming out for quarter, but when they found
that the promised quarter was not granted, setting themselves and the
grove on fire together, then Cleomenes led the Lacedæmonians to an
Argos stript of men. Then it was that Telesilla manned the walls with
all the slaves who through youth or age were reckoned unfit to carry
arms, and herself getting together all the arms which were left in
the houses or the temples, and mustering all the women in the prime
of life, armed them, and drew them up in battle array where she knew
the enemy would approach. And when the Lacedæmonians came up, and the
women so far from being dismayed at their war cry received their attack
stoutly, then the Lacedæmonians considering that if they killed all
the women their victory would be discreditable, and if they themselves
were beaten their reverse would be disgraceful, yielded to the women.
Now the Pythian Priestess had foretold this, and Herodotus, whether
understanding the oracle or not, had recorded it as follows.[22] “But
when the female conquering the male shall drive him out and win fame
for the Argives, then shall the god make many of the Argive women
wretched.” These words of the oracle describe the action of the women.




CHAPTER XXI.


And as you descend from thence and turn to the market-place you see the
tomb of Cerdo, the wife of Phoroneus, and the temple of Æsculapius.
And the temple of Artemis, under the name Persuasion, was erected also
by Hypermnestra, when she was victorious over her father in the trial
about Lynceus. There is also a brazen statue of Æneas, and a place
called Delta, but why it is called Delta I purposely pass over, for I
didn’t like the explanation. And in front of it is a temple of Zeus
Promoter of Flight, and near it is the sepulchre of Hypermnestra the
mother of Amphiaraus, and the sepulchre of Hypermnestra the daughter
of Danaus, who lies in the same grave with Lynceus. And opposite them
is the tomb of Talaus the son of Bias, about whom and his descendants
I have spoken already. And there is a temple of Athene under the name
of _Trumpet_, which they say Hegeleus built. This Hegeleus they say was
the son of Tyrsenus, who was the son of Hercules and a Lydian woman,
and Tyrsenus was the first who invented the trumpet, and Hegeleus his
son taught the Dorians who followed Temenus the use of it, and that
was why he called Athene _Trumpet_. And before the temple of Athene is
they say the tomb of Epimenides: for the Lacedæmonians when they fought
against the Gnossians took Epimenides alive, but killed him afterwards
because he did not prophesy auspiciously for them, and they say they
brought his remains, and buried them, here. And the building of white
stone, nearly in the middle of the market-place, is not a trophy over
Pyrrhus the king of Epirus, as the Argives say, but a memorial that his
body was burnt here, inasmuch as elephants and all other things which
he used in battle are represented here. This was the building for his
funeral pyre: but his bones lie in the temple of Demeter, where in my
account of Attica I have shown that he died. And at the entrance of
this temple of Demeter you may see his brazen shield hanging over the
door.

  And not far from the building in the market-place of the Argives
is a mound of earth. They say the head of the Gorgon Medusa lies
under it. To omit fable, it has been recorded of her that she was the
daughter of Phorcus, and that after the death of her father she ruled
over the people that live near the Tritonian marsh, and used to go out
hunting and led the Libyans in battle, and moreover resisted with her
army the power of Perseus, though picked men followed him from the
Peloponnese, but she was treacherously slain by night, and Perseus,
marvelling at her beauty even after death, cut her head off and brought
it home to display to the Greeks. But Procles the Carthaginian, the
son of Eucrates, has another account more plausible than this one. The
desert of Libya produces monsters scarce credible to those that hear
of them, and there both wild men and wild women are born: and Procles
said he had seen one of those wild men that had been taken to Rome. He
conjectured therefore that Medusa was a woman who had wandered from
them, and gone to the Tritonian marsh, and illtreated the inhabitants
till Perseus slew her: and Athene he thought assisted Perseus in the
work, because the men in the neighbourhood of the Tritonian marsh were
sacred to her. And in Argos close to this monument of the Gorgon is the
tomb of the Gorgon-slayer Perseus. Why she was called Gorgon is plain
to the hearer at once.[23] They say she was the first woman who ever
married a second husband, for she married one Œbalus, when her husband
Perieres the son of Æolus was dead, with whom she had lived from her
virginity. Previously it was customary for women to remain widows if
their husband died. And before this tomb is a trophy erected in stone
to the Argive Laphaes, whom, according to the Argive tradition, the
people rose up against and expelled when he was king, and when he
fled to Sparta the Lacedæmonians endeavoured to restore him, but the
Argives being victorious in the battle slew Laphaes and most of the
Lacedæmonians. And not far from this trophy is the temple of Leto, and
a statue of her by Praxiteles. And the figure near the goddess is the
maiden they call Chloris, who they say was the daughter of Niobe, and
was originally called Melibœa. And when the children of Amphion and
Niobe were slain by Apollo and Artemis, she alone and Amyclas were
saved alive, as they supplicated Leto. But fear turned Melibœa so
pale that she remained so all the rest of her life, insomuch that her
name was changed from Melibœa into Chloris (_pale_). This Chloris and
Amyclas the Argives say built the original temple of Leto. But I myself
am of opinion, (for I lean more than most people to the authority of
Homer,) that none of the children of Niobe survived. The following line
bears me out.

    “Two arrows only slew the whole family.”[24]

  Homer therefore describes the whole family of Amphion as cut off.




CHAPTER XXII.


Now the temple of Flowery Hera is on the right hand of the temple of
Leto, and in front of it is the tomb of the women who fell in the
fight between the Argives and Perseus, and had marched with Dionysus
from the islands in the Ægean, and who were called _Marines_ from
that circumstance. And right opposite the sepulchre of those women
is the temple of Demeter, surnamed Pelasgian because Pelasgus the
son of Triopas built it, and at no great distance from the temple
is Pelasgus’ tomb. And beyond the tomb is a brazen shrine not very
large, which contains old statues of Artemis and Zeus and Athene.
Lyceas in his verses has represented it as a votive offering to Zeus
the Contriver, and said that the Argives who went on the expedition
to Ilium swore here that they would not give over fighting, till they
should either capture Ilium or be killed fighting there. But others
have said that the remains of Tantalus are in that brazen shrine. I
will not dispute that the Tantalus who was the son of Thyestes or
Broteus, (for both traditions are current), who married Clytæmnestra
before Agamemnon, was buried here. But the Tantalus who was said to
be son of Zeus or Pluto was buried at Sipylus in a very handsome tomb
which I have myself seen. And moreover there was no necessity for him
to flee from Sipylus, as happened afterwards to Pelops when Ilus the
Phrygian came against him with an army. But let the enquiry proceed no
further. As for the rites which take place at the neighbouring trench,
they say they were instituted by Nicostratus, a man of those parts. To
this day they place in the trench lighted torches to Proserpine the
daughter of Demeter. There too is a temple of Poseidon under the name
of the _Flood-god_--for Poseidon flooded most of the region, because
Inachus and the other arbitrators decided that the land was Hera’s and
not his. But Hera afterwards got Poseidon to draw the water off: and
the Argives, at the place where the stream retired, built a temple
to Poseidon the _Flood-god_. And as you go a little further is the
tomb of Argos, who was reputed to be the son of Zeus and Niobe the
daughter of Phoroneus: and next is the temple of the Dioscuri. And
there are statues of them and their sons, Anaxis and Mnasinous, and
with them their mothers Hilaira and Phœbe, in black ebony wood, by
Dipœnus and Scyllis. Even the horses are mostly made of ebony, though
partly of ivory. And near this temple of the Dioscuri is a temple of
Ilithyia, the offering of Helen, when Theseus went with Pirithous to
Thesprotia, and Aphidna was captured by the Dioscuri, and Helen was
taken to Lacedæmon. For they say she was pregnant by Theseus, and
bare a child in Argos and built this temple to Ilithyia, and gave the
child to Clytæmnestra, who was now the wife of Agamemnon, and the
child afterwards became the wife of Menelaus. Euphorion the Chalcidian
and Alexander the Pleuronian have mentioned it in their poems, and
still earlier Stesichorus of Himera, and they say like the Argives
that Iphigenia was the daughter of Theseus by Helen. And beyond the
temple of Ilithyia is the temple of Hecate, and the statue is the work
of Scopas. It is of stone and right opposite are two brazen statues
of Hecate, one by Polycletus, and the other by his brother Naucydes
the son of Mothon. And as you go straight for the gymnasium, which
is called Cylarabis after Cylarabus, the son of Sthenelus, you come
to the tomb of Licymnius the son of Electryon. Homer says he was
slain by Tleptolemus the son of Hercules, who had to fly from Argos
in consequence of this murder. And, as you turn off a little towards
Cylarabis and the gate in this direction, is the sepulchre of Sacadas,
who was the first who played the Hymn to Apollo at Delphi on the flute:
and it seems the anger of Apollo against flute-players (which he had
in consequence of the contest with Marsyas the Silenus) was appeased
by this Sacadas. In this gymnasium of Cylarabus is a bust of Athene
Capanea, and they show the tomb of Sthenelus, and of Cylarabus himself.
And not far from this gymnasium is a monument to the Argives who sailed
with the Athenians to reduce Syracuse and Sicily.




CHAPTER XXIII.


As you go thence on the road called the Hollow Way, there is on the
right hand a temple of Dionysus: the statue of the god they say came
from Eubœa. For when the Greeks returning from Ilium were shipwrecked
at Caphareus, those of the Argives who contrived to escape to shore
were in evil plight from cold and hunger. But when they prayed that one
of the gods would save them in their present emergency, immediately as
they went forward they saw a cave of Dionysus, and a statue of the god
in the cave, and some wild goats that had taken refuge from the cold
were huddled together in it. These the Argives killed, and eat their
flesh, and used their skins for clothing. And when the winter was over,
they repaired their vessels and sailed homewards, and took with them
the wooden statue from the cave, and worship it to this day. And very
near the temple of Dionysus you will see the house of Adrastus, and at
some distance from it the temple of Amphiaraus, and beyond that the
tomb of Eriphyle. And next these is the shrine of Æsculapius, and close
to it the temple of Bato, who was of the family of Amphiaraus and one
of the Melampodidæ, and was Amphiaraus’ charioteer when he went out
to battle: and when the rout from Thebes came about, the earth opened
and swallowed up Amphiaraus and the chariot and Bato all together.
And as you return from the Hollow Way you come to the reputed tomb
of Hyrnetho. If it is a cenotaph and merely in memory of her, their
account is probable enough, but if they say that the body of Hyrnetho
lies there I cannot believe them, but let him believe them who knows
nothing about Epidaurus. The most famous of the temples of Æsculapius
at Argos has a statue still to be seen, Æsculapius seated, in white
stone, and next to him a statue of Hygiea. There are also seated
near them those who designed these statues, Xenophilus and Strato.
That temple was originally built by Sphyrus, the son of Machaon, and
the brother of the Alexanor who has honours among the Sicyonians at
Titane. And the statue of Pheræan Artemis, (for the Argives worship
Pheræan Artemis as well as the Athenians and Sicyonians,) was they say
brought from Pheræ in Thessaly. But I cannot agree with the Argives
who say that they have at Argos the tombs of Deianira the daughter of
Œneus, and of Helenus the son of Priam, and that they have the statue
of Athene that was carried away from Ilium, and whose loss caused its
fall. The Palladium, for that is its name, was certainly carried by
Æneas to Italy. As to Deianira, we know she died at Trachis and not
at Argos, and her tomb is near that of Hercules on Mount Œta. And as
to Helenus the son of Priam, I have already shown that he went with
Pyrrhus the son of Achilles to Epirus, and married Andromache, and
was Regent for the sons of Pyrrhus, and that Cestrine in Epirus took
its name from his son Cestrinus. Not that the Argive antiquarians are
ignorant that all their traditions are not true, still they utter
them: for it is not easy to get the mass of mankind to change their
preconceived opinions. There are other things at Argos worth seeing,
as the underground building, (in which is the brazen chamber which
Acrisius formerly got constructed for the safe custody of his daughter,
Perilaus deposed and succeeded him,) and the tomb of Crotopus, and
the temple of Cretan Dionysus. For they say that Dionysus, after he
had warred with Perseus and got friendly again with him, was highly
honoured by the Argives in various respects, and was given as a special
honour this enclosure. And afterwards it was called the temple of
Cretan Dionysus, because they buried Ariadne here. And Lyceas says that
when the temple was restored an earthenware cinerary urn was found that
contained the ashes of Ariadne: which he said several Argives had seen.
And near this temple of Dionysus is the temple of Celestial Aphrodite.




CHAPTER XXIV.


And the citadel they call Larissa from the daughter of Pelasgus, and
from two cities of that name in Thessaly, one on the coast, and one by
the river Peneus. And as you go up to the citadel there is a temple of
Hera Dwelling on the Heights, there is also a temple of Apollo, which
Pythæus, who first came from Delphi, is said to have erected. The
statue is of brass erect, and is called Apollo of the Ridgeway, for the
place is called Ridge. Oracular responses, for there is an oracle there
even to our day, are given in the following manner. The prophetess is
debarred from marriage: and when a lamb is sacrificed every month,
she tastes of the blood and becomes possessed by the god. And next to
the temple of Apollo of the Ridgeway is the temple of Athene called
_Sharp-eyed_, the votive offering of Diomede, because when he was
fighting at Ilium the goddess upon one occasion took a mist from his
eyes.[25] And close by is the race-course where they hold the games to
Nemean Zeus and to Hera. On the left of the road to the citadel is a
monument to the sons of Ægyptus. Their heads are here apart from their
bodies, for the bodies are at Lerna where the murder of the young men
was perpetrated, and when they were dead their wives cut their heads
off, to show their father their desperate deed. And on the summit of
Larissa is the temple of Larissæan Zeus, which has no roof to it: and
the statue, which is made of wood, stands no longer on its base. And
there is a temple of Athene well worth seeing. There are several votive
offerings there, and a wooden statue of Zeus, with the usual two eyes,
and a third in the forehead. This Zeus they say was the tutelary god of
Priam the son of Laomedon, and was placed in his hall in the open air,
and when Ilium was taken by the Greeks, it was to his altar that Priam
fled for refuge. And when they divided the spoil Sthenelus the son of
Capaneus got it, and placed it here. One might conjecture that the god
has three eyes for the following reason. That he reigns in heaven is
the universal tradition of all mankind. And that he reigns also under
the earth the line of Homer proves, speaking of him as

    “Zeus the lord of the under world, and dread Proserpine.”[26]

And Æschylus the son of Euphorion calls him also Zeus of the sea. The
sculptor therefore whoever he was represented him with three eyes to
denote that the god rules in these three departments of the universe.

  Among the roads from Argos to various parts of the Peloponnese,
is one to Tegea a town in Arcadia. On the right of this road is the
mountain Lycone, full of cypress trees. And on the top of the mountain
is a temple to Orthian Artemis, and there are statues of Apollo and
Leto and Artemis in white stone; said to be by Polycletus. And as you
go down from the mountain there is on the left of the road a temple of
Artemis. And at a little distance on the right is the mountain called
Chaon. And underneath it trees are planted, and manifestly here the
Erasinus has its rise: for a while it flows from Stymphalus in Arcadia,
as the Rheti flow from Euripus to Eleusis and so to the sea. And where
the river Erasinus gushes out on the mountain-side they sacrifice to
Dionysus and Pan, and keep the feast of Dionysus called _Medley_. And
as you return to the Tegean road, you come to Cenchreæ on the right of
what is called Trochus. Why it was called Cenchreæ they do not tell us,
except the name came from Cenchreus the son of Pirene. There is here a
general tomb of the Argives who conquered the Lacedæmonians in battle
near Hysiæ. I ascertained that this battle was fought when Pisistratus
was ruler at Athens, and in the 4th year of the Olympiad in which
Eurybotus the Athenian won the prize in the course. And as you descend
to the plain are the ruins of the town Hysiæ in Argolis, and here they
say the reverse happened to the Lacedæmonians.




CHAPTER XXV.


The road to Mantinea from Argos is not the same as the road to Tegea,
but you start from the gates near the ridge. And on this road there
is a temple with a double entrance, one facing west, another east.
At the east end is a wooden statue of Aphrodite, at the west one of
Ares. These statues are they say votive offerings of Polynices and the
Argives who were associated with him in his expedition. And as you go
on from thence after crossing the winter torrent called Ravine you come
to Œnoe, which gets its name (so the Argives say) from Œneus, who was
king in Ætolia, and expelled they say from his kingdom by the sons of
Agrius, and went to Argos to Diomede. And he helped him somewhat by
leading an army into Calydonia, but he couldn’t he said stay there:
but recommended him if he liked to accompany him to Argos. And when he
went there, he treated him in all respects well, as one would expect a
person to treat his grandfather, and when he died he buried him here.
The place got called Œnoe by the Argives after him. And above Œnoe is
the Mountain Artemisium, and a temple of Artemis on the top of the
mountain. And on this mountain are the sources of the Inachus: for it
has its rise here, though it flows underground for some way. There is
nothing else to see here.

  And another road from the gates near the Ridge goes to Lyrceia. This
is the place to which Lynceus alone of all the 50 brothers is said to
have escaped, and when he got there safe, he held up a lighted torch
there. For it was no doubt agreed between Hypermnestra and him that he
should do so as a signal, if he should escape from Danaus and get to
a place of safety. And she also they say kindled another at Larissa,
manifestly to show that she too was in no danger. And in memory of
this the Argives every year have a torch procession. And in those
days the place was called Lynceia, but afterwards, because Lyrcus an
illegitimate son of Abas lived there, it got the name Lyrceia from him.
There is nothing very notable among the ruins but the effigy of Lyrcus
on a pillar. From Lyrceia to Argos is about 60 stades, and it is about
the same distance from Lyrceia to Orneæ. Homer has made no mention of
Lyrceia in his catalogue, as the city was already depopulated at the
time of the expedition to Ilium: but Orneæ, which was still inhabited,
Homer[27] has recorded before Phlius and Sicyon, according to its
geographical situation in Argolis. And it got its name from Orneus the
son of Erechtheus: and this Orneus had a son Peteos, and he had a son
Menestheus, who aided Agamemnon with a force from Athens to put down
the dominion of Priam. From Orneus then the city got its name, and the
Argives afterwards dispossessed the people of Orneæ; and when they were
dispossessed they were naturalized among the Argives. And there is at
Orneæ a temple of Artemis, and a wooden statue of the goddess in an
erect posture, and another temple to all the gods in common. And beyond
Orneæ are Sicyonia and Phliasia.

  And as you go from Argos to the district of Epidaurus there is a
building on the right hand like a pyramid, with some Argolic shields
worked on it as a design. Here Prœtus fought with Acrisius for the
supremacy, and their contest was they say drawn, and they had a peace
afterwards, as neither of them could conquer the other. And they say
that they engaged first with shields, and then they and the army
on both sides in full armour. And those who fell on both sides, as
they were fellow citizens and kinsmen, had one tomb and monument in
common. And as you go on from thence and turn to the right you come
to the ruins of Tiryns. And the Argives dispossessed the inhabitants
of Tiryns, wishing to take them in as settlers to aggrandize Argos.
And they say the hero Tiryns, from whom the city got its name, was the
son of Argus the son of Zeus. And the walls of the city, which are the
only ruins left, are the work of the Cyclopes made of rude stones, each
stone of so gigantic a size that the smallest of them could hardly
be moved by a pair of mules. And in ancient times small stones were
inserted so as to dovetail in with the large stones. And as you go down
to the sea, are the chambers of the daughters of Prœtus. And when you
return to the high road you will come to Midea on the left. They say
that Electryon the father of Alcmena was king of Midea. But now nothing
is left of Midea but the site. And on the direct road to Epidaurus is
the village Lessa, and there is a temple of Athene in it, and a wooden
statue very similar to that in the citadel at Larissa. And above Lessa
is the Mountain Arachnæum, which in old times in the days of Inachus
had the name of Sapyselaton. And there are altars on it to Zeus and
Hera. They sacrifice to these gods here when there is a deficiency of
rain.




CHAPTER XXVI.


And near Lessa is Epidaurus in Argolis, and before you get to the town
itself, you will come to the temple of Æsculapius. I do not know who
dwelt in this place before Epidaurus came to it: nor could I learn from
any of the people of the neighbourhood anything about his descendants.
But the last king they say before the Dorians came to the Peloponnese
was Pityreus, the descendant of Ion the son of Xuthus. He they say gave
up the land without fighting for it to Deiphontes and the Argives: and
retired to Athens with his subjects and dwelt there, and Deiphontes
and the Argives who espoused his cause occupied Epidauria. For there
was a split among the Argives at the death of Temenus, Deiphontes and
Hyrnetho being hostile to the sons of Temenus, and the army with them
favouring Deiphontes and Hyrnetho more than Cisus and his brothers.
Epidaurus, from whom the country got its name, was, as the people
of Elis say, the son of Pelops: but according to the opinion of the
Argives, and the poem of Hesiod called The Great Eœæ, the father of
Epidaurus was Argus the son of Zeus. But the Epidaurians make Epidaurus
the son of Apollo. And the district was generally held sacred to
Æsculapius for the following reason. The Epidaurians say that Phlegyas
came to the Peloponnese on the pretext of seeing the country, but
really to spy out the population, and see if the number of fighting
men was large. For Phlegyas was the greatest warrior of that day, and,
whoever he attacked, used to carry off their corn and fruit and booty
of all kinds. But when he came to the Peloponnese his daughter followed
him, who though her father knew it not was with child by Apollo. And
when she bore her child on Epidaurian soil, she exposed it on the
mountain called in our day Titthion, but which was then called Myrgion.
And as he was exposed there one of the she-goats feeding on the
mountain gave him milk, and the watch-dog of the flock guarded him. And
Aresthanas, for that was the name of the goat-herd, when he found the
number of the goats not tallying and that the dog was also absent from
the flock, went in search everywhere, and when he saw the child desired
to take him away, but when he got near saw lightning shining from the
child, and thinking there was something divine in all this, as indeed
there was, he turned away. And it was forthwith noised abroad about the
lad both by land and sea that he could heal sicknesses, and raise the
dead. There is also another tradition told of him, that Coronis, when
pregnant with Æsculapius, lay with Ischys the son of Elatus, and that
she was put to death by Artemis who thus punished her unfaithfulness
to Apollo, and when the funeral pyre was already lighted Hermes is
said to have plucked the child from the flame. And a third tradition
is as it seems to me the least likely of all, which makes Æsculapius
the son of Arsinoe, the daughter of Leucippus. For when Apollophanes
the Arcadian went to Delphi and enquired of the god, whether Æsculapius
was the son of Arsinoe and a citizen at Messene, Apollo answered from
his oracle, “O Æsculapius, that art born a great joy to all mortals,
whom lovely Coronis, the daughter of Phlegyas, bare to me the child of
love, at rocky Epidaurus.” This oracular response shows plainly that
Æsculapius was not the son of Arsinoe, but that Hesiod, or somebody
that interpolated Hesiod, inserted that legend to please the people
of Messene. And this too bears me out that Æsculapius was born at
Epidaurus, that his worship is derived from thence. For the Athenians
call the day on which they worship Æsculapius _Epidauria_, and they
say the god is worshipped by them from Epidaurus; and also Archias the
son of Aristæchmus, being healed in Epidauria of a convulsion that
seized him when he was hunting near Pindasus, introduced the worship
of the god at Pergamum. And from the people of Pergamum it passed in
our time to the people of Smyrna. And at Balagræ amongst the Cyrenæans
the Epidaurian Æsculapius is called _Doctor_. And from the Cyrenæans
Æsculapius got worshipped in Labene among the Cretans. And there
is this difference between the Cyrenæan and Epidaurian customs of
worshipping Æsculapius, that the former sacrifice goats, which is not
customary with the latter. And I find that Æsculapius was considered as
a god from the beginning, and not merely as he got fame as time went
on, from other proofs, and the testimony of Homer in what Agamemnon
says about Machaon,

    “Talthybius, call here as quickly as possible Machaon the mortal,
        the son of Æsculapius,”

as if he said the man the son of the god.[28]




CHAPTER XXVII.


The sacred grove of Æsculapius is walled in on all sides: nor do any
deaths or births take place in the precincts of the god, just as is the
case at the island Delos. And the sacrifices, whether any native of
Epidaurus or stranger be the sacrificer, they consume in the precincts.
The same I know happens at Titane. And the statue of Æsculapius is in
size half that of Olympian Zeus at Athens, and is made of ivory and
gold: and the inscription shows that it was by the Parian Thrasymede
the son of Arignotus. The god sits on a seat holding a staff in one
hand, and the other hand he has on a dragon’s head, and a dog is seated
at his feet. And on the seat are represented the actions of Argive
heroes, as Bellerophon killing the Chimæra, and Perseus with the head
of Medusa. And beyond the temple is a sleeping-place for suppliants.
And a round building has been built near well worth seeing, of white
stone, called the Rotunda. And in it there is a painting by Pausias of
Cupid throwing away his bow and arrows and taking up a lyre instead.
There is also here a painting of Drunkenness, also by Pausias, drinking
out of a glass bowl. You may see in the painting the glass bowl and in
it a woman’s face reflected. And six pillars to this day stand in the
precincts, but in old time there were more. On these are recorded the
names of men and women healed by Æsculapius, and the complaint from
which each suffered, and how they were cured, written in Doric. And
apart from the rest is an ancient pillar, which states that Hippolytus
offered 20 horses to the god. And the people of Aricia have a tradition
corresponding to the inscription on this pillar, that, when Hippolytus
died in consequence of the imprecations of Theseus, Æsculapius restored
him to life again: and when he came to life again, he refused to pardon
his father, and disregarding his entreaties went into Italy to the
people of Aricia, and there became king and built a temple to Artemis,
where in my time the prize for victory in single combat was to become
the priest of the goddess. But the contest was not for freemen, but for
slaves who had run away from their masters. And the Epidaurians have a
theatre in their temple, especially well worth seeing in my opinion:
for the Roman theatres beat all in the world in magnificence, and for
size the Arcadian theatre at Megalopolis carries the day: but for
beauty of proportion what architect could compete with Polycletus? And
Polycletus it was that designed this theatre and round building. And
within the grove there is a temple of Artemis, and a statue of Epione,
and a temple of Aphrodite and Themis, and a stadium, as generally among
the Greeks, consisting of a mound of earth, and a fountain well worth
seeing for its roof and other decoration. And Antonine the Senator
constructed in our days a bath of Æsculapius, and a temple of the gods
they call the _Bountiful Gods_. He built also a temple for Hygiea and
for Æsculapius and for Apollo under the title of Egyptian gods. He
restored also Cotys’ porch for the roof had fallen in and it had all
come to ruin as it had been built of unbaked brick. And the Epidaurians
who lived near the temple were especially unfortunate, for their women
might not bear children under a roof but only in the open air. But
Antonine set this right and erected a building where it was lawful
both to die and bear children. And there are two mountains above the
grove, one called Titthion and the other Cynortion, and on the latter
a temple to Maleatian Apollo. The building is ancient, but everything
else in connection with the temple, as the reservoir _e.g._ in which
rainwater is stored up, was put there by Antonine for the benefit of
the Epidaurians.




CHAPTER XXVIII.


Now all kinds of dragons, and especially those which incline to tawny
in colour, are considered sacred to Æsculapius, and are tame, and the
Epidaurian country alone breeds them. I find similar phenomena in other
countries. Thus Libya alone breeds land crocodiles no smaller than two
cubits, and from India alone come parrots and other birds. For the
great snakes in size as big as 30 cubits, which are produced in India
and in Libya, the Epidaurians say are not dragons but another species
altogether. And as you ascend the mountain called Coryphon there is
an olive tree called Twisted, its having been so moulded by Hercules’
hand is the origin of the name. I can hardly believe that he meant this
for a boundary for the Asinæi in Argolis, for as the country on both
sides lies waste one could find no clear boundary here. And on the top
of the mountain Coryphon is the temple of Artemis, which Telesilla has
mentioned in a poem. And as you go down to the city of the Epidaurians
is a place, called Hyrnethium, full of wild olives that grow there. I
shall record the Epidaurian tradition and the probable truth. Cisus and
the other sons of Temenus knew that they would greatly vex Deiphontes,
if they could by any means get Hyrnetho from him. Cerynes and Phalces
therefore went alone to Epidaurus: for Argæeus the youngest did not
approve of their plot. And they leaving their travelling carriage near
the walls sent a messenger to their sister, wishing they said to have
a conversation with her. And when she complied with their invitation,
the young men at once brought various charges against Deiphontes, and
begged her earnestly to return to Argos, making various promises, and
that they would give her in marriage to a man in every respect better
than Deiphontes, to the ruler of a larger population and a more fertile
country. And Hyrnetho vexed at their words gave them back as good as
they brought, and said that Deiphontes was acceptable to her as a
husband, and that to be Temenus’ son in law was not to be despised,
but they ought to be called rather Temenus’ murderers than his sons.
And they made no reply to her, but took hold of her, put her into the
travelling carriage, and drove off. And an Epidaurian took the news to
Deiphontes that Cerynes and Phalces had gone off with Hyrnetho against
her will. And he came to the rescue with all speed, and the Epidaurians
when they heard what the matter was came to the rescue with him. And
Deiphontes when he came up with Cerynes shot at him and killed him
with an arrow, but as Phalces was close to Hyrnetho he did not dare
to shoot at him, lest he should miss him and kill her, but he closed
with him and endeavoured to get her away. But Phalces resisting and
pulling Hyrnetho too violently killed her, for she was pregnant. And
he perceiving what he had done to his sister, drove the travelling
carriage at full speed, hastening to be off before the Epidaurians
could come up: and Deiphontes with his sons (for he had had by Hyrnetho
Antimenes and Xanthippus and Argeus, and one daughter Orsobia, who
afterwards married Pamphylus the son of Ægimius), took the dead body of
Hyrnetho and conveyed it to the place which is now called Hyrnethium.
And they built a chapel to her memory and paid her other honours, and
with regard to the olive trees that grow in her grove, or any other
trees there, it is an established custom that no one should break
pieces of them off and carry them away, nor use them for any purpose,
but leave them intact as sacred to Hyrnetho. And not far from the city
is the sepulchre of Melissa, who was the wife of Periander the son of
Cypselus, and the sepulchre of Proclees the father of Melissa. And he
was king at Epidaurus, as his son in law Periander was at Corinth.




CHAPTER XXIX.


Epidaurus has the following things most worthy of record. There is
a temple of Æsculapius, and statues of Æsculapius and Epione, who
they say was his wife. These are in the open air, and are of Parian
marble. And there are temples of Dionysus and Artemis, the latter as
a Huntress. There is a temple also built to Aphrodite: and near the
harbour on the cliff jutting out into the sea is they say one of Hera.
And the Athene in the citadel, a wooden statue well worth seeing, they
call Cissæan Athene.

  The Æginetans inhabit the island opposite Epidauria. And they say
there were no inhabitants there originally, but Zeus having taken Ægina
the daughter of Asopus there to that desert island, it was called Ægina
after her instead of its old name Œnone, and when Æacus was grown up
he asked of Zeus for settlers, and then they say that Zeus produced
men from the soil. And they can tell of no king reigning there but
Æacus, for we know of none of the sons of Æacus continuing there, for
Peleus and Telamon had to flee for the murder of Phocus, and the sons
of Phocus again dwelt near Parnassus in what is now called Phocis. And
the name Phocis was given to the district when Phocus of the family of
Ornytion first came to it. In the days of this Phocus the country near
Tithorea and Parnassus was called Phocis: but in the days of Æacus the
name Phocis included everybody from Minyæ near Orchomenus to Scarphea
in Locris. And Peleus’ sons were kings in Epirus, and of Telamon’s
sons the family of Ajax was rather obscure (as he lived in a retired
way privately), except Miltiades, who led the Athenians at Marathon,
and his son Cimon, both of whom were exceedingly illustrious. And
the descendants of Teucer were kings of Cyprus down to Evagoras. And
according to the poet Asius Phocus’ sons were Panopeus and Crisus: and
the son of Panopeus was Epeus, who according to Homer was the contriver
of the wooden horse, and the grandson of Crisus was Pylades, the son
of Strophius, the son of Crisus by Anaxibia the daughter of Agamemnon.
Such is the pedigree of the so-called Æacidæ, but they branched off
from the beginning into other directions. And in after time a part of
the Argives that had occupied Epidaurus with Deiphontes crossed over to
Ægina, and, mixing among the old settlers at Ægina, introduced into the
island the Doric language and manners. And the Æginetans became a great
power, so that they were even a greater naval power than the Athenians,
and in the Persian War furnished the greatest number of vessels next
to the Athenians, but their prosperity did not last, for they were
turned out of Ægina by the Athenians, and went and dwelt at Thyrea
in Argolis, which the Lacedæmonians gave them. They recovered Ægina
indeed, when the Athenian triremes were captured at the Hellespont, but
never regained their former wealth and power. Of all the Greek islands
Ægina is the most difficult of access. For there are rocks under the
sea all round it, and sunken reefs. And they say that Æacus contrived
this on purpose from fear of pirates, and that he might not be exposed
to enemies. And near the chief harbour is a temple of Aphrodite, and
in the most conspicuous part of the city what is called the Hall of
Æacus, a square court of white stone: at the entrance of which are
statues of the envoys who were sent by the Greeks to Æacus. All give
the same account of this as the Æginetans. A drought for some time
afflicted Greece, and there was no rain either beyond the Isthmus or in
the Peloponnese, until they sent messengers to Delphi, to enquire the
cause, and at the same time to beg to be rid of the evil. The Pythian
Priestess told them to propitiate Zeus, and that, if he was to listen
to them, Æacus must be the suppliant. Accordingly they sent envoys
from every city to beg Æacus to do so. And he offered sacrifices and
prayers to Pan-Hellenian Zeus and caused rain to come on the earth:
and the Æginetans made these effigies of all the envoys that had come
to him. And within the precincts are some olive trees planted a long
time ago, and an altar not much higher than the ground, which it is
secretly whispered is a memorial of Æacus. And near the Hall of Æacus
is the tomb of Phocus, a mound of earth with a base in the shape of a
circle, and on it is a rough stone: and when Telamon and Peleus invited
Phocus to the contest of the pentathlum, and it was Peleus’ turn to
throw the stone, which served them for a quoit, he purposely threw it
at Phocus and hit him. And in this they gratified their mother, for
they were the sons of Endeis the daughter of Sciron, and Phocus was the
son of her sister Thetis, if the Greeks speak the truth. And Pylades
appears to me for this reason, and not merely in friendship to Orestes,
to have contrived the death of Neoptolemus. But when Phocus was struck
by the quoit and fell down dead, then the sons of Endeis got on board
ship and fled. And Telamon later on sent a messenger, and endeavoured
to clear himself of having contrived the death of Phocus. But Æacus
would not let him land on the island, but bade him if he liked pile up
a mole in the sea and make his defence there. Accordingly he sailed to
the harbour called Secret, and by night produced a mole, which remains
to this day. And being pronounced guilty of the death of Phocus he
sailed back again to Salamis. And not far from this harbour Secret is
a theatre well worth seeing, in size and workmanship very similar to
the one at Epidaurus. And behind it is built one side of a stadium,
upholding the theatre and serving as a prop for it.




CHAPTER XXX.


And near one another are temples of Apollo, and Artemis, and Dionysus.
The wooden statue of Apollo is naked and of native art, but Artemis
and Dionysus are draped, and Dionysus is represented with a beard. But
the temple of Æsculapius is on the other side and not here, and the
statue of stone, seated. And of all the gods the people of Ægina honour
Hecate most, and celebrate her rites annually, saying that Orpheus the
Thracian introduced those rites. And within the precincts is a temple,
containing a wooden statue of Hecate by Myron, with only one head and
one body. Alcamenes as it seems to me was the first who made the statue
of Hecate with three heads and three bodies which the Athenians call
Hecate Epipurgidia: it stands near the temple of Wingless Victory.
And in Ægina as you go to the mountain of Pan-Hellenian Zeus is the
temple of Aphæa, about whom Pindar wrote an ode for the Æginetans. And
the Cretans say, (for her worship is indigenous among them too), that
Eubulus was the son of that Carmanor who purged Apollo of the murder
of Python, and that Britomartis was the daughter of Zeus by Carme the
daughter of Eubulus: and that she rejoiced in races and hunting, and
was a very great friend of Artemis. And fleeing from Minos, who was
enamoured of her, she threw herself into some nets set for catching
fish. Artemis made her a goddess, and she is worshipped not only by
the Cretans but also by the Æginetans, who say that Britomartis was
seen in their island. And she is called Aphæa in Ægina, but Dictynna
in Crete. And the mountain Pan-Hellenium has nothing of note but the
temple of Zeus, which they say Æacus erected. As to what concerns
Auxesia and Lamia, how there was no rain at Epidaurus, and how after
receiving olive trees from Athens they made wooden statues according to
the bidding of the oracle, and how the Epidaurians did not pay to the
Athenians their charge for the Æginetans having these statues, and how
the Athenians who crossed over to Ægina to exact payment perished, all
this has been told accurately and circumstantially by Herodotus. I do
not therefore care to write again what has been so well told before,
but this much I may say that I have seen the statues and sacrificed to
them as they are accustomed to sacrifice at Eleusis.

  Let so much suffice for Ægina, and Æacus and his exploits. And
next to Epidauria come the people of Trœzen, who are proud of their
country if any people are. And they say that Orus was a native of
their country. To me however the name Orus seems decidedly Egyptian
and not at all Greek. However they say he was their king, and that the
country was called Oræa after him, and Althepus the son of Poseidon
by Leis the daughter of Orus, succeeding to Orus, called the country
Althepia. When he was king they say that Athene and Poseidon had a
dispute about the country, and resolved to hold it in common, for so
Zeus ordered them to do. And so they worship Athene under the names
Polias and Sthenias, and Poseidon under the name of king. And so their
ancient coins have on them a trident and the head of Athene. And next
to Althepus Saron was king, who they say built the temple to Saronian
Artemis near the sea where it was muddy on the surface, insomuch that
it was called the Phœbæan marsh. And it chanced that Saron, who was
very fond of hunting, was pursuing a stag and followed it to the sea
as it fled. And it swam further and further from the land, and Saron
continued to follow it up, till in his impetuosity he got out to open
sea, and, as he was by now tired, and the waves were too much for him,
he was drowned. And his dead body was cast on shore on the Phœbæan
marsh, and they buried him in the grove of Artemis, and they call the
sea here after him the Saronian marsh instead of the Phœbæan. The
names of the kings that followed him they do not know till Hyperes and
Anthas, who they say were the sons of Poseidon by Alcyone the daughter
of Atlas, and built the cities in that country called Hyperea and
Anthea. And Aetius the son of Anthas, succeeding his father and uncle
in the kingdom, called one of these two cities Poseidonias. And when
Trœzen and Pittheus joined Aetius, there were three kings instead of
one, and the sons of Pelops were the stronger. And this proves it.
After the death of Trœzen Pittheus joined together Hyperea and Anthea,
and combined the inhabitants into one city, which he called Trœzen from
the name of his brother. And many years afterwards the descendants
of Aetius, the son of Anthas, were sent on a colony from Trœzen, and
colonized Halicarnassus in Caria, and Myndus. And the sons of Trœzen,
Anaphlystus and Sphettus, migrated to Attica, and gave their names to
two townships. And as regards Theseus the son of Pittheus’ daughter I
do not write to people who know all the history. But I must narrate
thus much. When the Heraclidæ returned to the Peloponnese the people
of Trœzen received as colonists the Dorians from Argos, having been
formerly subject to the Argives. And Homer in his catalogue says that
they were under the rule of Diomede. Diomede at least and Euryalus the
son of Mecisteus, who were Regents for Cyanippus the son of Ægialeus,
led the Argives to Troy. But Sthenelus, as I have shown before, was of
more illustrious birth, being of the family of the Anaxagoridæ, and
the kingdom of the Argives was more his by right. Such are all the
historical details about Trœzen, except a list of the cities which
are said to have been colonized from Trœzen. I will now describe the
contents of the temples and other notable things in Trœzen.




CHAPTER XXXI.


In the market-place is a temple, and statues, of Artemis the Saviour.
And it is said that Theseus built it and called her Saviour, when he
returned from Crete after having killed Asterion the son of Minos. This
seems to me to have been the most notable of all his exploits, not
so much because Asterion excelled in bravery all who were killed by
Theseus, but because he escaped the hidden snares of the labyrinth, and
all this makes it clear that Theseus and his companions were saved by
providence. In this temple are altars of the gods said to rule in the
lower world: and they say that Semele was brought here from Hades by
Dionysus, and that Hercules brought Cerberus here from Hades. But I do
not think that Semele died at all, as she was the wife of Zeus: and as
to Cerberus I shall elsewhere tell what I think.

  And behind the temple there is a monument of Pittheus, and three
seats are on it of white stone: and Pittheus and two others with
him are said to be giving sentence on these seats. And at no great
distance is a temple of the Muses, built they say by Ardalus, the son
of Hephæstus: who they think discovered the use of the flute, and so
they call the Muses Ardalian after him. Here they say Pittheus taught
the art of language, and I have myself read a book written by Pittheus,
that was given me by an Epidaurian. And not far from, the temple of
the Muses is an ancient altar, erected as they say also by Ardalus. And
they sacrifice on it to the Muses and Sleep, saying that Sleep is the
god most friendly to the Muses. And near the theatre is a temple of
Lycean Artemis, which Hippolytus built. Why the goddess was so called I
could not find from the antiquarians, but it seems to me it was either
because Hippolytus drove out the wolves that ravaged Trœzen and the
neighbourhood, or that it was a title of Artemis among the Amazons, of
whom his mother was one. Or there may be some other explanation which I
do not know. And the stone in front of the temple called the holy stone
was they say the stone on which formerly the 9 men of Trœzen cleared
Orestes of the murder of his mother. And not far from the temple of
Lycean Artemis are altars at no great distance from one another.

  The first of them is one of Dionysus, called Saviour in accordance
with some oracle, and the second is called Themidon, Pittheus dedicated
it they say. And they very likely built an altar to the Sun the
Liberator when they escaped the slavery of Xerxes and the Persians. And
they say Pittheus built the temple of Thearian Apollo, which is the
oldest of all I know. There is indeed an old temple of Athene among
the Phocians in Ionia, which Harpagus the Persian burnt, old also is
the temple of Pythian Apollo among the Samians, but far later are both
than this one at Trœzen. And the statue of the god is still to be seen,
the votive offering of Auliscus, and the design of Hermon of Trœzen,
who also made wooden statues of the Dioscuri. And there are also in
the porch in the market-place stone statues of the women and children
whom the Athenians committed to the charge of the people of Trœzen,
when they resolved to leave Athens, and not to encounter the attack of
the Mede with a land force. And they are said to have put here statues
not of all those women, for they are not many here, but only of those
who were especially remarkable for merit. And there is a building in
front of the temple of Apollo, called the tent of Orestes. For before
he was cleared of his mother’s blood, none of the people of Trœzen
would receive him in their houses: but they put him here and gradually
cleared him and fed him here, till the expiatory rites were completed.
And to this day the descendants of those that cleared him feast here on
appointed days. And the expiations having been buried not far from this
tent, they say a laurel sprang up from them, which is still to be seen
in front of the tent. And they say that Orestes among other purgations
used water from Hippocrene. For the people of Trœzen have a well called
Hippocrene, and the tradition about it is the same as the Bœotian
tradition. For they too say that water sprang up from the ground when
Pegasus touched the ground with his hoof, and that Bellerophon came to
Trœzen to ask for Æthra as his wife from Pittheus, but it so chanced
that before the marriage came off he fled from Corinth.

  And there is here a statue of Hermes called Polygius, and they say
Hercules offered his club to it, and the club was of wild olive, and,
(believe it who will,) sprouted in the earth and grew, and is now a
tree, for Hercules they say discovered the wild olive in the Saronian
marsh and cut a club of it. There is also a temple of Zeus Soter, built
they say by King Aetius the son of Anthas. And they call their river
Chrysorrhoe (_golden stream_), for when there was a drought in the land
and no rain for nine years, and all other water they say dried up, this
Chrysorrhoe continued to flow as usual.




CHAPTER XXXII.


And Hippolytus the son of Theseus has precincts and a temple in them
and ancient statue. Diomede they say erected all these, and was the
first to sacrifice to Hippolytus: and the people of Trœzen have
a priest of Hippolytus who serves for life, and they have yearly
sacrifices, and the following custom. Every maiden cuts off a lock of
her hair before marriage, and takes it and offers it at this temple.
And they don’t represent Hippolytus as having died through being torn
in pieces by his horses, nor do they point out his tomb if they know
it: but they try to make out that Hippolytus is called in heaven
the Charioteer, and has this honour from the gods. And within his
precincts is the temple of Apollo Epibaterius, the votive offering of
Diomede when he escaped the storm which fell on the Greeks as they were
returning from Ilium: they say also that Diomede first established
the Pythian games in honour of Apollo. And as to Lamia and Auxesia
(for they also have their share of honour) the people of Trœzen do
not give the same account as the Epidaurians and Æginetans, but say
that they were virgins who came from Crete, and in a general commotion
in the city were stoned by one of the rival factions, and they have
a festival to them called Stonethrowing. And in another part of the
precincts is what is called Hippolytus’ race-course, and overlooking
it a temple of Peeping Aphrodite: where, when Hippolytus was training,
Phædra would gaze at him in her love. Here too grows the myrtle with
the leaves pricked, as I described before: for when Phædra was in
despair and found no relief for her love-pains, she wreaked her agony
on the leaves of the myrtle. And Phædra’s tomb is here, not very far
from the monument of Hippolytus, or that myrtle tree. And there is a
statue of Æsculapius by Timotheus, but the people of Trœzen say it is
not Æsculapius but Hippolytus. I saw also the house of Hippolytus, and
in front of it is what is called the Well of Hercules, the water (as
the people of Trœzen say) which Hercules discovered. And in the citadel
there is a temple of Athene Sthenias, the wooden statue of the goddess
is by Callon of Ægina; who was the pupil of Tectæus and Angelion, who
designed the statue of Apollo at Delos; and they were pupils of Dipœnus
and Scyllis. And as you go down from thence you come to the temple of
Pan the Deliverer, for he shewed dreams to the chief people of the
Trœzenians which brought about deliverance from the plague, which
pressed so hard on the Athenians. And in the environs of Trœzen you
will see a temple of Isis, and above it one of Aphrodite of the Height:
the temple the Halicarnassians built for Trœzen their mother city; but
the statue of Isis was a votive offering of the people of Trœzen.

  As you go along the mountains to Hermione you see the source of
the river Hyllicus, which was originally called Taurius, and a rock
called Theseus’ rock, which used in former times to be called the altar
of Sthenian Zeus, but had its name changed to Theseus’ rock because
Theseus found under it the shoes and sword of Ægeus. And near this rock
is the temple of Bridal Aphrodite, which was built by Theseus when
he married Helen. And outside the walls is a temple of Fruit-giving
Poseidon: for they say that Poseidon in wrath threatened to make their
land fruitless, by casting brine on the seeds and roots of their
plants, till mollified by their sacrifices and prayers he sent brine on
their land no longer. And above the temple of Poseidon is Law-giving
Demeter, which was built they say by Althepus. And as you descend to
the harbour near what is called Celenderis, is the place which they
call Natal-place, because they say Theseus was born there. And in front
of this place is a temple of Ares on the spot where Theseus conquered
the Amazons in battle: they must have been some of that band who fought
in Attica with Theseus and the Athenians. And as you go towards the
Psiphæan sea there is a wild olive tree called twisted _Rhachus_. The
people of Trœzen give that name to every kind of olive that bears no
fruit, whether its general name is κοτινός, or φυλίας, or ἔλαιος. And
they call it twisted because, the reins catching in it, the chariot
of Hippolytus got overturned. And at no great distance from this is
the temple of Saronian Artemis, about which I have already given an
account. But this much more shall be stated, that they keep an annual
feast called Saronia to Artemis.




CHAPTER XXXIII.


Of the islands near Trœzen one is so close to the mainland, that you
can wade over to it at low water. It was called Sphæria in former days,
and _Sacred_ for the following reason. It contains the tomb of Sphærus,
who they say was the charioteer of Pelops. He had a dream from Athene,
that Æthra crossed over into the island with offerings for the dead,
and when she crossed over there ’tis said that Poseidon had an intrigue
with her. Accordingly Æthra built a temple here to _Injurious Athene_,
and called the island _Sacred_ instead of Sphæria: she also imposed
the custom on the maidens of Trœzen that they should before marriage
dedicate their maiden-girdle to _Injurious Athene_. And they say the
island Calaurea was in ancient days sacred to Apollo, when Delphi
belonged to Poseidon, it is also said that they exchanged these places
with one another. And they produce in support of their statement the
following oracle,

    “It is all one whether you dwell at Delos or Calaurea
    At sacred Pytho or the wind-swept Tænarus.”

  There is also at Calaurea a sacred temple to Poseidon, and the
priestess is a maiden till the period for marriage. And within the
precincts is the tomb of Demosthenes. Fortune seems to have shown
especial malignity to Demosthenes as earlier to Homer, since Homer was
not only blind but overwhelmed by such poverty that he was a strolling
beggar on every soil, and Demosthenes in his old age had to taste the
bitterness of exile, and came to a violent end. Much has been said
about Demosthenes by others and by himself, by which it is clear that
he had no share in the money which Harpalus brought from Asia, but
what was said afterwards I will relate. Harpalus, after having fled
from Athens and crossed over with the fleet to Crete, was murdered
not long afterwards by some of his attendant slaves: but some say
he was treacherously murdered by the Macedonian Pausanias. And the
dispenser of the money fled to Rhodes, and was arrested by Philoxenus
the Macedonian, who had also demanded the extradition of Harpalus
from the Athenians. And getting this lad he cross-questioned him,
until he obtained full intelligence of those who had had any money
from Harpalus: and when he ascertained their names he sent letters to
Athens. Although in those letters he enumerated the names of those who
had had any money from Harpalus, and the precise sum which each of
them had, he made no mention whatever of Demosthenes, though he was
most bitterly hated by Alexander, and although Philoxenus himself was
privately his enemy. Demosthenes had honours paid to him in other parts
of Greece also as well as by the inhabitants of Calaurea.




CHAPTER XXXIV.


In the Trœzenian district there is an isthmus jutting out some way into
the sea, and on it has been built a small town near the sea called
Methana. And there is a temple of Isis there, and a statue in the
market-place of Hermes, and another of Hercules. And at the distance of
about 30 stades from this small town are some warm baths. And they say
that water first appeared there when Antigonus, the son of Demetrius,
was King of the Macedonians, and water did not first appear, but fire
bubbled up from the ground, and when this burnt itself out then water
began to flow, which bubbles up even to this day warm and very salt.
And if one bathes here the water is not cold near the shore, but if
you go well out to sea swimming is dangerous, for there are many kinds
of sea-monsters and especially sea dogs. But the most wonderful thing
at Methana I will now record. The South West Wind when the vines are
growing blows upon them from the Saronic Gulf, and scorches them up.
And when the wind is still sweeping down on them, two men take a cock
with white feathers only, and tear it in half, and run round the vines
in different directions, each with half the cock, and when they come
back to the place where they started, they bury it there. This is their
invention and contrivance against the South West Wind. The little
islands, which lie just off the coast, 9 in number, they call the
islands of Pelops, and they say when it rains rain never comes on one
of them. Whether this is so I do not know, but the people about Methana
say so, and I have heard of people trying to avert hail by sacrifices
and incantations. Methana then is an Isthmus in the Peloponnese: and
inside the Trœzenian Isthmus is the neighbouring town of Hermione. And
the people of Hermione say that the founder of the old city was one
Hermion the son of Europs. And this Europs, who was certainly the son
of Phoroneus, was said by Herophanes of Trœzen to be illegitimate, on
the ground that the kingdom of Argos would not have come to Argus the
daughter’s son of Phoroneus, had Phoroneus had a legitimate son. But,
even if Europs was legitimate and died before Phoroneus, I know very
well that a son of his would not have been considered equal to Niobe’s
son, who was reckoned to be the son of Zeus. And afterwards Dorians
from Argos colonized Hermione, but amicably I think, for had there been
a war it would have been mentioned by the Argives.

  And there is a road to Hermione from Trœzen along the rock which was
formerly called the altar of Zeus Sthenius, but after Theseus removed
the shoes and sword of Ægeus, it was called Theseus’ rock. As you go
by this rock on the mountain side, you come to the temple of Apollo
called _The God of the Plane-Trees_, and the hamlet is called Ilei,
and in it are temples of Demeter and her daughter Proserpine. And near
the sea, on the border of the territory of Hermione, is a temple of
Demeter under the title Thermasia. And at the distance of about eighty
stades is the promontory called Scyllæum from Scylla, the daughter
of Nisus. For after Minos took Nisæa and Megara through her treason,
he refused to marry her though he had promised, and even ordered the
Cretans to throw her overboard, and the tide washed her dead body on
to this promontory. And they exhibit no tomb of her, for they say that
her body was neglected, and carried away by sea birds bit by bit. And
as you sail from Scyllæum in the direction of the city is another
promontory called Bucephala, and next to it 3 islands, of which the
first is Haliusa, which affords a convenient harbour for ships to ride
at anchor, and next is Pityusa, and the third they call Aristeræ. And
as you coast along by these islands, there is another promontory called
Colyergia jutting out from the mainland, and next it an island called
Tricrana, and a mountain Buporthmus jutting out into the sea from the
Peloponnese. And at Buporthmus is a temple of Demeter and Proserpine,
and also one of Athene under the title Promachorma. And in front of
Buporthmus lies an island called Aperopia. And at no great distance
from Aperopia is another island called Hydrea. And the shore on the
mainland opposite these islands extends in a crescent shape, and is
rocky from the easterly direction close to the sea as far as the temple
of Poseidon, but slopes at the westerly end of the bay, where it has
its harbours. The length of this rocky headland is about seven stades,
and the breadth in the broadest part about three stades or a little
more. Here was the old town of Hermione. And even now there are several
temples there, one of Poseidon at the commencement of the headland,
and as you go from the sea to the heights a temple of Athene, and near
it some remains of a race-course, where they say the sons of Tyndareus
used to practise. There is also another small temple of Athene, but
the roof has fallen in. And there is a temple to the Sun, and another
to the Graces, and another to Serapis and Isis. And there is a circle
of huge unhewn stones, and inside this circle they perform the sacred
rites of Demeter. Such are the objects to be seen at the old town of
Hermione. But the new town is at about four stades’ distance from the
promontory on which there is the temple of Poseidon, and it lies on a
gentle slope as you ascend the hill called Pron, for that is its name.
There is a wall all round Hermione. And it has various objects of
interest, but what I select as most worthy of record are the temple of
Marine Aphrodite and Aphrodite of the Harbour, and a statue of white
stone of huge size, and a work of art. And there is another temple of
Aphrodite, which has other honours from the people of Hermione and
this special one, that maidens or widows intending to marry must all
sacrifice here before their marriage. And Thermasian Demeter has two
temples, one on the borders of Trœzen as I have before said, and one in
new Hermione.




CHAPTER XXXV.


And next is a temple of Dionysus Melanægis, in whose honour they have a
musical contest every year, and give prizes for diving and rowing. And
there is a temple of Artemis under the name of Iphigenia, and a statue
of Poseidon in bronze with one foot on a dolphin. And as you proceed
to the temple of Vesta, you find no statue, but an altar on which they
sacrifice to Vesta. And there are three temples and three statues of
Apollo: one has no title, the second is called Pythæan Apollo, and
the third Apollo of the Borders. The name Pythæan they borrowed from
the Argives: for Telesilla says that to their country first of all
the Greeks came Pythæus the son of Apollo. But why they call the god
Apollo of the Borders I cannot precisely tell, but I conjecture that
having obtained victory either by war or litigation in reference to the
borders, they honoured for this Apollo of the Borders. And the temple
of Fortune is they say the latest one that the people of Hermione have,
the statue is colossal in Parian marble. And they have two wells, one
an old one into which the water flows by a hidden channel, but it would
never grow dry, not even if all the population were to come and drink
of it: and another dug in our day, and the name of the place from which
the water flows into it is Meadow. But the temple most worthy of notice
is that of Demeter on the Pron. This temple the people of Hermione say
was built by Clymenus, the son of Phoroneus, and by Chthonia the sister
of Clymenus. And the Argives say, when Demeter came to Argolis, that
Atheras and Mysius offered the goddess hospitality, but Colontas would
neither receive her into his house, nor pay her any other attention:
and in this he acted very much against the wish of his daughter
Chthonia. And Colontas they say for this conduct was burnt house and
all, but Chthonia was conveyed to Hermione by Demeter, and built the
temple there to Demeter. And Demeter is called Chthonia there, and the
annual festival held in her honour in the season of summer is called
Chthonia too. And they keep the festival in this wise. The priests of
the gods and all the town authorities for the year lead the procession,
and the women and men follow. It is customary for boys too to honour
the goddess by a procession, in which they take part clothed in white,
and with garlands on their heads plaited of the flower which they call
here _cosmosandalum_, but which seems to me from size and colour to
resemble the hyacinth, it has also on its petals the same mournful
letters. And the procession is followed by some people who lead a full
grown heifer from the herd, tightly bound with ropes and curvetting
wildly. Some drag this heifer to the temple and unfasten the ropes so
as to let it inside, while others keep the doors open till they see
the heifer inside, and then shut them. And four old women are waiting
inside, and they finish the heifer. For whoever can get the chance
cuts its throat with a sickle. And afterwards the doors are opened,
and those who have this duty drive up a second, third, and even fourth
heifer. The women finish them all off in the same way, and then this
fresh wonder is added to the sacrifice: on whichever side the first
heifer falls all must fall. This is the way in which the sacrifice is
performed by the people of Hermione. And in front of the temple there
are a few statues of women who have been priestesses of Demeter, and as
you enter in there are seats on which the old women sit, waiting for
each heifer to be driven in, and there are some statues not very old
of Athene and Demeter. But the special object of their worship neither
have I seen nor any man, whether stranger or native of Hermione. These
old women only know what it is.

  There is also another temple: and there are statues all round it.
This temple is opposite the temple of Chthonia, and is called the
temple of Clymenus, to whom they sacrifice here. I don’t think Clymenus
is the name of an Argive that came to Hermione, but the title of a god
who according to the tradition was a king in the infernal regions. Hard
by is another temple and statue of Ares. On the right of the temple of
Chthonia is a porch, called by the natives Echo, as a man’s slightest
whisper is repeated thrice. And behind the temple of Chthonia are
some places which the people of Hermione call, one Clymenus’ place,
and another Pluto’s place, and a third the Acherusian marsh. They
are all fenced in with a wall of stone: and in Clymenus’ place there
is a hole in the ground, through which Hercules brought up Cerberus
according to the tradition of the people of Hermione. And near the gate
from which the road leads straight to Mases, is a temple of Ilithyia
within the walls. They propitiate the goddess Ilithyia in various ways
every day with sacrifices and incense, and to her are most of the
votive offerings given, but her statue no one may look at except her
priestesses.




CHAPTER XXXVI.


About seven stades on the high road to Mases, as you turn to the left,
is the road to Halice. Halice in our days is deserted, but it was
formerly inhabited, and is mentioned on the pillars of the Epidaurians,
which record the cures wrought by Æsculapius. I know of nothing else
worthy of record, either of the place or its population. And the
road that leads to it passes between Pron and another mountain that
in old times was called Thornax. But because of the legendary change
of Zeus into the cuckoo they say its name was changed to Coccygium
(_Cuckoo-mountain_). And there are temples on the tops of both these
mountains, one of Zeus on the top of Coccygium, and one of Hera on the
top of Pron. That at Coccygium is at the end of the mountain, and it
has neither doors nor roof, nor any statue in it, and it was said to be
Apollo’s temple. And near it is a road to Mases as you take the turn to
the right. And Mases was a town in old times, as Homer has mentioned
it in his catalogue of the Argives, and the people of Hermione use
it as their port now. And from Mases there is a road on the right to
the promontory called Struthus, and it is about 250 stades from this
promontory along the mountain passes to what is called Philanorium and
to Bolei. Bolei consists of layers of unhewn stones. And another place
which they call Didymi is 20 stades from Bolei. At Didymi there is a
temple of Apollo, and another of Poseidon, and another of Demeter: and
their statues are erect, in white stone.

  As you go from thence you come to the district of the Argives
formerly called Asinæa from its chief town Asine, the ruins of which
are near the sea. And when the Lacedæmonians under their king Nicander,
the son of Charillus, the son of Polydectes, the son of Eunomus, the
son of Prytanis, the son of Eurypon, invaded Argolis with an army, the
people of Asine joined them, and ravaged with them the territory of
the Argives. But when the Lacedæmonian force went home again, then the
Argives and their king Eratus marched against Asine. And for some time
the people of Asine defended their walls, and slew several of the most
valiant of the Argives and among them Lysistratus, but when their walls
were carried, then they put their wives and children on shipboard and
left the town, and the Argives razed it to the ground, and added it to
their territory, but they left the temple of Apollo standing, and it is
now to be seen, and they buried Lysistratus near it.

  Now the sea at Lerna[29] is about 40 stades from Argos. And as you
go down to Lerna you first come to the river Erasinus, which flows
into the Phrixus, and the Phrixus into the sea between Temenium and
Lerna. And as you turn from the Erasinus about 8 stades to the left
there is a temple of the Dioscuri called the Kings: and their statues
are of wood just like those in the city. And as you turn to the right
you cross the Erasinus, and come to the river Chimarrus. And near it
is a circle of stones, and here (so the story goes) Pluto, after the
Rape of Proserpine the daughter of Demeter, descended to his supposed
underground realms. Now Lerna is, as I have previously said, by the
sea, and they have rites here to Demeter of Lerna. And there is a
sacred grove beginning at the mountain which they call Pontinus. And
this mountain Pontinus does not let the rain flow off, but absorbs it.
Though the river Pontinus does indeed flow from it. And on the top of
the mountain is the temple of Saitian Athene, only ruins now, and the
foundations of the house of Hippomedon, who accompanied Polynices the
son of Œdipus in his attempt against Thebes.




CHAPTER XXXVII.


And the grove of plane-trees beginning at this mountain extends most of
the way to the sea, bounded on one side by the river Pontinus, and on
the other by the river Amymone, which gets its name from the daughter
of Danaus. And inside the grove are statues of Demeter Prosymne and
Dionysus, and the statue of Demeter is seated and not a large one.
These are of stone: but in another temple there is a wooden one of
Dionysus the Saviour seated; and a stone statue of Aphrodite near the
sea, which they say was a votive offering of the daughters of Danaus,
and Danaus himself erected the temple of Athene near the Pontinus.
And they say that Philhammon was the founder of the rites at Lerna.
The traditions about these mysteries are manifestly not very ancient.
And what I have heard was written on a heart made of orichalcum; this
Arriphon could not have got from Philhammon, for Arriphon was a native
of Triconium in Ætolia, and held in most repute of all the Lycians in
our time, and a clever fellow at finding out what nobody before knew,
and who no doubt found this out for himself. The verses and all the
prose mixed up with the verses were in Doric: but before the return of
the Heraclidæ to the Peloponnese the Argives used the same dialect as
the Athenians. And in the days of Philhammon I do not believe that even
the name of Dorians was known throughout all Greece. This proves my
case.

  And near the source of the Amymone grows a plane-tree, under which
they say the hydra was reared. I believe that this beast was larger in
size than other water-snakes, and that its poison was so venomous that
Hercules dipped the points of his arrows in its gall, but I cannot help
thinking it had only one head and not more. But Pisander of Camirus,
that the beast might appear more formidable and so add lustre to his
poem, described it as having many heads. I have seen also the well of
Amphiaraus and the Alcyonian marsh, by which the Argives say Dionysus
descended to Hades to fetch up Semele, for Polymnus shewed him the
descent. There is indeed no end to the depth of the Alcyonian marsh,
nor do I know of any man who by any device ever got to the bottom of
it, since even Nero, though he got and fastened together ropes many
stades long, and put a piece of lead and other apparatus for sounding
at the end, never could arrive at an accurate knowledge of its depth. I
have also heard that though the water of the marsh, as you would infer
from looking at it, is calm and quiet, if anyone ventures to swim in
it, it is sure to drag him down and suck him underneath to the bottom.
The circuit of the lake is not large, only about a third of a stade,
and on its banks are grass and reeds. But the nightly rites which take
place near it annually I am not permitted to write for public reading.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.


And as you go from Lerna to Temenium--now Temenium belongs to the
Argives, and gets its name from Temenus the son of Aristomachus: for
he occupied and fortified the place, when he fought with the Dorians
against Tisamenus and the Achæans from this base--the river Phrixus
has its outlet into the sea, and there is a temple of Poseidon at
Temenium and another of Aphrodite, and there is a monument of Temenus
which is honoured by the Dorians at Argos. And about 50 stades I should
say from Temenium is Nauplia, deserted in our day, it was founded by
Nauplius who is reputed to have been the son of Poseidon and Amymone.
And there are still some remains of walls at Nauplia, and a temple
of Poseidon and a harbour, and a well called Canathus: in which the
Argives say Hera bathes every year and becomes a virgin again. This is
a tradition in connection with the secret rites which they perform to
Hera. And the traditions of the people of Nauplia about the ass, that
by gnawing twigs off the vine it makes the produce more abundant, (and
consequently they have an ass carved on the rock as having taught the
art of pruning vines), I pass over deeming them unworthy of mention.
There is also another road going from Lerna by the seaside to a place
which they call Genesium: and near the sea close to Genesium there is
a small temple of Poseidon. And close to this is another place called
Landing-place: for according to tradition this was the first place in
Argolis where Danaus and his sons landed. And as you go on from thence
is a place called Anigræa, on a road narrow and difficult of access.
It is on the left hand and extends to the sea, and is a good soil for
trees especially olive trees. And as you go up to the mainland there
is a place called Thyrea, where 300 picked men of the Argives fought
with 300 picked men of the Lacedæmonians for the possession of the
land. And as they were all killed except one Spartan and two Argives,
the tombs of those that fell in the action were piled up here, but
the Lacedæmonians afterwards got a firm footing at the place, as they
fought in full force with the Argives, and enjoyed it themselves for
a time, and afterwards gave it to the Æginetans who had been driven
out of Ægina by the Athenians. And in my day the Argives inhabited
the district of Thyrea, and they say that they recovered it justly by
conquest. Next to that burial-ground you come to Athene, where those
Æginetans dwelt, and another village Neris, and a third Eua, the
largest of the three villages, and Polemocrates has a temple in it.
He was the son of Machaon, and brother of Alexanor, and he heals the
people here, and has divine honours from the inhabitants. And beyond
these villages extends Mount Parnon, which is the boundary between the
Lacedæmonians and Argives and people of Tegea. And some stone Hermæ
stand as border stones to mark the boundaries, and the place gets its
name from them. And there is a river called Tanaus, the only river
which flows from Mount Parnon. It flows through Argive territory into
the Thyreatic gulf.




FOOTNOTES:

[13] Iliad xvi. 490, 491, cf. also Hes. Th. 444.

[14] Odyss., xi. 261-65.

[15] Iliad, ii. 117.

[16] Hesiod. _Works and Days._ 265. Cf. also Ovid, A.A. i. 655, 656.

[17] “Inventus forsan eodem modo est quo Eurotas, iii. i.” _Siebelis_.

[18] Iliad, ii. 571.

[19] Hymn to Demeter, 474-476.

[20] ii. 120.

[21] See the story told by Addison, _Spectator_, No. 483.

[22] Hdt. vi. 77.

[23] The word _Gorgon_ means _grim_, terrible.

[24] Il. xxiv. 609.

[25] See Il. v. 127, 128.

[26] Il. ix. 457.

[27] Iliad, ii. 571.

[28] Iliad, iv. 193, 194. Is Pausanias nodding here?

[29] _Qu._ “Now Lerna by the sea” (ἡ κατὰ Θάλασσαν Λέρνα). Cf. a little
below.




BOOK III.--LACONIA.




CHAPTER I.


Next to the Hermæ comes Laconia on the West. And according to the
Lacedæmonian tradition Lelex the _autochthon_ first reigned in this
land, and the people over whom he ruled were called after him Leleges.
And Lelex’ sons were Myles and a younger son Polycaon. Where Polycaon
went to and why I shall relate elsewhere. But on the death of Myles his
son Eurotas succeeded him in the kingdom. He diverted to the sea by a
canal all the stagnant water that filled the plain, and as it flowed
to the sea in mighty volume and became a noble river, he called it the
Eurotas. As he had no male children he left the kingdom to Lacedæmon,
whose mother was Taygete, (who gave her name to the mountain Taygetus),
and reputed father Zeus. And Lacedæmon married Sparta the daughter of
Eurotas, and when he succeeded to the kingdom he first gave the country
and inhabitants his own name, and then built and gave his wife’s name
to the city Sparta, which is so called even to our day. And Amyclas
his son, wishing also himself to leave a memorial behind him, built
the little town Amyclæ in Laconia. And of his sons Hyacinthus, the
youngest and most handsome, died in his father’s lifetime, and there
is a monument of him at Amyclæ close to the statue of Apollo. And on
the death of Amyclas the succession devolved upon Argalus his eldest
son, and after the death of Argalus upon Cynortas. And Cynortas had
a son called Œbalus. He married Gorgophone the daughter of Perseus
from Argos, and had a son Tyndareus, with whom Hippocoon contended for
the kingdom, claiming it on the ground of seniority. And Icarius and
his party espousing Hippocoon’s cause, he far exceeded Tyndareus in
power, and compelled him to retire from fear to Pellene, according to
the Lacedæmonian account. But the account of the Messenians is that
Tyndareus fled to Aphareus in Messenia, and that Aphareus was the son
of Perieres and the uterine brother of Tyndareus: and they say he dwelt
at Thalamæ in Messenia, and had sons born to him there. And some time
afterwards he was restored by Hercules and recovered his kingdom. And
his sons reigned after him, as well as his son-in-law Menelaus the
son of Atreus, and Orestes the husband of Hermione the daughter of
Menelaus. But when the Heraclidæ returned in the reign of Tisamenus
the son of Orestes, one party in Messene and Argos made Temenus king,
and another section Cresphontes. And in Lacedæmon as Aristodemus had
twins there were two royal houses, and they say this was in accordance
with the oracle at Delphi. And they say that Aristodemus died at
Delphi before the Dorians returned to the Peloponnese. Some indeed,
magnifying their own history, say that Aristodemus was shot with
arrows by Apollo, because he had not gone to the oracle, but consulted
Hercules whom he chanced to meet first, as to how the Dorians should
return to the Peloponnese. But the truer account is that the sons of
Pylades and Electra, who were cousins of Tisamenus the son of Orestes,
murdered Aristodemus. The names of his two sons were Procles and
Eurysthenes, who though they were twins were in most respects very
unlike one another. But though they hated one another very cordially,
yet they jointly combined with Theras, the son of Autesion, their
Argive mother’s brother, and their Regent, in establishing a colony
at the island which was then called Calliste, Theras hoping that the
descendants of Membliarus would abandon the kingdom of their own free
will, as in fact they did, reckoning that Theras’ pedigree went up to
Cadmus, whereas they were only descendants of Membliarus, a private
individual whom Cadmus left in the island as leader of the colonists.
And Theras gave his own name to the island instead of Calliste, and the
people of Thera even now yearly offer victims to him as their founder.
And Procles and Eurysthenes vied with one another in their zeal for
carrying out the wishes of Theras, but in all other respects were at
variance together. Not that, even if they had been one in heart and
mind, I could have put all their descendants into one common pedigree,
as cousin with cousin, and cousins’ children, with cousins’ children,
and so on, that to the latest posterity they should arithmetically
dovetail in with one another. I shall therefore pursue the history of
each family separately, and not mix up the two together in one account.




CHAPTER II.


Eurysthenes, the eldest of the sons of Aristodemus, had a son Agis they
say: (and from him they call the descendants of Eurysthenes Agidæ).
During his reign, when Patreus the son of Preugenes founded the city in
Achaia called to this day Patræ after him, the Lacedæmonians took part
in that colony. They cooperated also with Grais, the son of Echelas,
the son of Penthilus, the son of Orestes, who was sailing with a fleet
to make a colony somewhere or other. And he indeed was destined to
occupy the country between Ionia and Mysia, which is in our day called
Æolis: his grandfather Penthilus had already occupied Lesbos, the
island opposite this mainland. And during the reign of Echestratus the
son of Agis at Sparta the Lacedæmonians expelled all the Cynurians that
were in their prime, alleging as their excuse that robbers from Cynuria
ravaged Argolis, and the Argives were their kinsmen, and that the
Cynurians themselves made open incursions into Argolis. If tradition
speaks true the Cynurians were originally Argives, and they say their
founder was Cynurus the son of Perseus. And not many years afterwards
Labotas the son of Echestratus was king at Sparta. This Labotas, as we
are told by Herodotus in his account of Crœsus, had during his minority
the famous legislator Lycurgus as his Regent, only Herodotus calls him
Leobotes instead of Labotas. In his days first did the Lacedæmonians
make war against the Argives, and they alleged as their reasons for
declaring war that the Argives when they invaded Cynuria took a slice
of Lacedæmonian territory, and tried to stir up their neighbouring
subjects to revolt. In this war they say nothing very notable was done
on either side: and those of this family who succeeded one another as
kings, _viz._ Doryssus the son of Labotas and Agesilaus the son of
Doryssus, both died at no great interval after one another. And it was
when Agesilaus was king that Lycurgus legislated for the Lacedæmonians,
and some say that he derived his laws from Crete, others that he was
instructed by the Oracle at Delphi. And the Cretans say that their laws
come from Minos, who received divine assistance in codifying them. And
it seems to me that Homer has hinted as much in the following lines
about the legislation of Minos, “There too is Gnossus, the great city
where Minos reigned nine years, the bosom-friend of great Zeus.”[30]
But of Lycurgus I shall have more to say hereafter. And the son of
Agesilaus was Archelaus. In his reign the Lacedæmonians conquered in
war and enslaved one of the neighbouring cities called Ægys, suspecting
that the people of it had an understanding with the Arcadians. And
Charillus, the king of the other family, assisted Archelaus against
Ægys, and his own separate doings as leader of the Lacedæmonians I
shall relate later on when I come to the so-called Eurypontidæ. And
the son of Archelaus was Teleclus. In his reign the Lacedæmonians took
in war the neighbouring cities of Amyclæ and Pharis and Geranthræ,
which were then in the possession of the Achæans, and razed them to
the ground. The inhabitants however of Pharis and Geranthræ, being
terrified at the approach of the Dorians, agreed to evacuate the
Peloponnese upon conditions: but the people of Amyclæ they could
not drive out at first assault, but only after a long siege and the
greatest exhibition of valour. And the Dorians themselves shewed this
by erecting a trophy after the conquest of Amyclæ, as thinking that
conquest no small feather in their cap. And not long after all this
Teleclus was killed by the Messenians in the temple of Artemis in the
town of Limnæ, on the borders between Laconia and Messenia. And after
the death of Teleclus Alcamenes his son succeeded him, and during his
reign the Lacedæmonians sent to Crete Charmidas the son of Euthys,
one of the most famous men in Sparta, who put down the insurrection
at Crete, and persuaded the Cretans to abandon the cities which were
inland and in other respects weak, and to inhabit instead those which
were conveniently situated on the coast. The Lacedæmonians also
depopulated Helos, a city by the sea in the possession of the Achæans,
and defeated the Argives who came to the help of the people of Helos.




CHAPTER III.


And after the death of Alcamenes Polydorus his son succeeded to the
kingdom, and the Lacedæmonians sent a colony into Italy to Croton,
and to the Locrians at the promontory Zephyrium: and the war that
was called the war with Messene was at its height when Polydorus was
king. The Lacedæmonians and Messenians give different reasons for
this war. Their different accounts, and the progress of the war, will
be set forth by me in their turn: but thus much will I record at
present that Theopompus the son of Nicander had the greatest hand in
the first war with the Messenians, being the king of the other house.
And after the end of the war, when Messenia was already conquered by
the Lacedæmonians, and Polydorus was in good repute at Sparta, and
popular with the Lacedæmonians and especially with the populace, for he
exhibited no violence either in word or deed to anyone, and in legal
cases tempered justice with mercy, when in short he had a brilliant
fame throughout all Greece, he was murdered by Polemarchus a man of no
mean family in Lacedæmon, but hotheaded, as indeed he shewed by this
murder. And after his death Polydorus received many notable honours
from the Lacedæmonians. Polemarchus also had a monument at Sparta,
whether being judged to have been a good man previously, or that his
relatives buried him privately. During the reign of Eurycrates the son
of Polydorus the Messenians patiently endured the Lacedæmonian yoke,
nor was any revolution attempted by the Argive people, but in the days
of Anaxander the son of Eurycrates--for fate was already driving the
Messenians out of all the Peloponnese--the Messenians revolted from
the Lacedæmonians, and fought against them for some time, but were
eventually conquered, and evacuated the Peloponnese upon conditions of
war. And the remnant of them became slaves on Lacedæmonian soil, except
those who inhabited the maritime towns. All the circumstances of this
war and revolt of the Messenians I have no need to recount in detail in
the present part of my history. And Anaxander had a son Eurycrates, and
this second Eurycrates a son Leo. During their reigns the Lacedæmonians
met with the greatest reverses in fighting against the people of
Tegea. And in the reign of Anaxandrides the son of Leo they overcame
the people of Tegea, and in the following way. A Lacedæmonian by name
Lichas came to Tegea at a time when Lacedæmon and Tegea were at peace
together. And on Lichas’ arrival they made a search for the bones of
Orestes, and the Spartans sought for them in accordance with an oracle.
And Lichas discovered that they were lying in the shop of a blacksmith,
and he discovered it in this way: all that he saw in the blacksmith’s
shop he compared with the oracle at Delphi, thus he compared the
blacksmith’s bellows to the winds, because they produce a strong wind,
the hammer was the blow, that which resists the blow was the anvil, and
that which was a source of woe to man he naturally referred to iron,
for people already began to use iron in battle, for the god would have
spoken of brass as a source of woe to man in the days of the heroes.
And just as this oracle was given to the Lacedæmonians about the bones
of Orestes, so afterwards the Athenians were similarly instructed by
the oracle to bring Theseus’ bones to Athens from Scyrus, for otherwise
Scyrus could not be taken. And Cimon the son of Miltiades discovered
the bones of Theseus, he too by ingenuity, and not long after he took
Scyrus. That in the days of the heroes all arms alike were brass is
borne witness to by Homer in the lines which refer to the axe of
Pisander and the arrow of Meriones. And I have further confirmation
of what I assert in the spear of Achilles which is stored up in the
temple of Athene at Phaselis, and the sword of Memnon in the temple of
Æsculapius at Nicomedia, the former has its tip and handle of brass,
and, the latter is of brass throughout. This we know to be the case.
And Anaxandrides the son of Leo was the only Lacedæmonian that had two
wives together and two households. For his first wife, excellent in
other respects, had no children, and when the ephors bade him divorce
her, he would not consent to this altogether, but only so far as to
take a second wife as well. And the second wife bare a son Cleomenes,
and the first wife, though so long barren, after the birth of Cleomenes
bare Dorieus, and Leonidas, and Cleombrotus. And after the death of
Anaxandrides, the Lacedæmonians though they thought Dorieus the better
man both in council and war, reluctantly rejected him, and gave the
kingdom to Cleomenes according to their law of primogeniture.




CHAPTER IV.


And Dorieus, as he would not remain at Lacedæmon subject to Cleomenes,
was sent to form a colony. And Cleomenes commenced his reign by an
inroad into Argolis, gathering together an army of Lacedæmonians and
allies. And when the Argives came out to meet him armed for battle, he
conquered them, and when they were routed about 5,000 of them fled into
a neighbouring grove, which was sacred to Argus the son of Niobe. And
Cleomenes, who often had a touch of the mad, ordered the Helots to set
this grove on fire, and the grove was entirely consumed, and all these
fugitives in it. He also marched his army against Athens, and at first,
by freeing the Athenians from the yoke of the sons of Pisistratus,
got for himself good fame among the Lacedæmonians and all the Greeks,
but afterwards in his favour to an Athenian called Isagoras, tried
to get for him the dominion over the Athenians. But failing in this
expectation, and the Athenians fighting stoutly for their freedom,
he ravaged various parts of their territory, and they say laid waste
a place called Orgas, sacred to the gods at Eleusis. He also went to
Ægina, and arrested the leading men there for their support to the
Medes, as they had persuaded the citizens to supply King Darius the
son of Hystaspes with earth and water. And while Cleomenes was staying
at Ægina, Demaratus the king of the other family was calumniating him
to the multitude at Lacedæmon. And Cleomenes on his return from Ægina
contrived to get Demaratus ejected from the kingdom, and bribed the
priestess at Delphi to utter as oracular responses to the Lacedæmonians
about Demaratus whatever he told her, and also instigated Leotychides,
one of the royal house and same family as Demaratus, to be a rival
claimant for the kingdom. And Leotychides caught at some words, which
Aristo formerly had foolishly thrown out against Demaratus at his
birth, saying that he was not his son. And when the Lacedæmonians took
this question about Demaratus, as they took all their questions, to the
oracle at Delphi, the priestess gave them as replies whatever Cleomenes
had told her. Demaratus therefore was deposed from his kingdom by the
hatred of Cleomenes and not on just grounds. And Cleomenes after this
died in a fit of madness, for he seized his sword, and stabbed himself,
and hacked his body about all over. The Argives say he came to this bad
end as a judgment for his conduct to the 5,000 fugitives in the grove,
the Athenians say it was because he ravaged Orgas, and the Delphians
because he bribed the priestess at Delphi to tell falsehoods about
Demaratus. Now there are other cases of vengeance coming from heroes
and gods as on Cleomenes, for Protesilaus who is honoured at Eleus, a
hero not a whit more illustrious than Argus, privately punished the
Persian Artayctes, and the Megarians who had dared to till the holy
land could never get pardon from the gods of Eleusis. Nor do I know
of anyone that ever dared to tamper with the oracle but Cleomenes
alone. And as Cleomenes had no male children the kingdom devolved
upon Leonidas the son of Anaxandrides, the brother of Dorieus on both
sides. It was in his reign that Xerxes led his army into Greece, and
Leonidas with his 300 Lacedæmonians met him at Thermopylæ. There have
been many wars between the Greeks and barbarians, but those can easily
be counted wherein the valour of one man mainly contributed to glorious
victory, as the valour of Achilles in the war against Ilium, and that
of Miltiades in the action at Marathon. But indeed in my opinion the
heroism of Leonidas excelled all the great deeds of former times. For
Xerxes, the most sagacious and renowned of all the kings that ruled
over the Medes and Persians, would have been prevented, at the narrow
pass of Thermopylæ, by the handful of men that Leonidas had with him,
from seeing Greece at all, and from afterwards burning Athens, had it
not been for a certain Trachinian who led round by a pass on Mount
Œta the army of Hydarnes so as to fall on the Greek flank, and, when
Leonidas was conquered in this way, the barbarians passed into Greece
over his dead body. And Pausanias the son of Cleombrotus was not king
after Leonidas, but was Regent for Plistarchus Leonidas’ son during his
minority, and he led the Lacedæmonians to Platæa and afterwards passed
over to the Hellespont with a fleet. I especially admire the conduct
of Pausanias to the Coan lady, who was the daughter of a man of no
mean note among the Coans, _viz._ of Hegetorides the son of Antagoras,
and against her will the concubine of Pharandates the son of Teaspis,
a Persian: and when Mardonius fell in the battle at Platæa, and the
barbarians were annihilated, Pausanias sent this lady home to Cos, with
the ornaments and all other apparel that the Persian had given her.
Moreover he would not suffer the dead body of Mardonius to be outraged,
though the Æginetan Lampon urged it.




CHAPTER V.


Plistarchus the son of Leonidas died soon after succeeding to the
kingdom, and Plistoanax the son of Pausanias, the hero of Platæa,
succeeded him. And Plistoanax was succeeded by his son Pausanias. This
is that Pausanias who led an army into Attica, ostensibly against
Thrasybulus and the Athenians, but really to establish the dominion
of the Thirty Tyrants who had been set over Athens by Lysander. And
he conquered in an engagement the Athenians who guarded the Piræus,
but directly after the battle he took his army off home again, not to
bring upon Sparta the most shameful disgrace of establishing the power
of unholy men. And when he returned from Athens with nothing to show
for his battle, his enemies brought him to trial. Now a king of the
Lacedæmonians is tried by a court composed of twenty-eight Seniors,
and the Ephors, and the King of the other family. Fourteen of the
Seniors and Agis, the King of the other family, condemned Pausanias,
the rest of the Court acquitted him. And no long time after the
Lacedæmonians gathering together an army against Thebes, the reason
for which war we shall relate in our account about Agesilaus, Lysander
marched into Phocis, and, having mustered the Phocians in full force,
lost no time in advancing into Bœotia, and making an attack upon the
fortified town Haliartus, which would not revolt from Thebes. Some
Thebans however and Athenians had secretly entered the town, and they
making a sally and drawing up in battle array, Lysander and several
of the Lacedæmonians fell. And Pausanias, who had been collecting
forces from Tegea and the rest of Arcadia, came too late to take part
in the fight, and when he got to Bœotia and heard of the death of
Lysander and the defeat of his army, he nevertheless marched his army
to Thebes, intending to renew the fight there. But when he got there
he found the Thebans drawn up in battle array against him, and it was
also reported that Thrasybulus was coming up with an Athenian force;
accordingly, fearing to be taken between two fires, he made a treaty
with the Thebans, and buried those who had fallen in the sally from
Haliartus. This conduct of his did not please the Lacedæmonians, but
I praise his determination for the following reason. Well knowing
that reverses always found the Lacedæmonians surrounded by a swarm of
enemies, what happened after Thermopylæ and in the island of Sphacteria
made him afraid of causing a third disaster. But as the citizens
accused him of slowness in getting to Bœotia he did not care to stand
a second trial, but the people of Tegea received him as a suppliant
at the temple of Alean Athene. This temple was from time immemorial
venerated throughout the Peloponnese, and afforded safety to all
suppliants, as was shewn by the Lacedæmonians to Pausanias, and earlier
still to Leotychides, and by the Argives to Chrysis, who all took
sanctuary here, and were not demanded up. And after the voluntary exile
of Pausanias, his sons Agesipolis and Cleombrotus being quite young,
Aristodemus the next of kin was appointed Regent: and the success of
the Lacedæmonians at Corinth was owing to his generalship. And when
Agesipolis came of age and took over the kingdom, his first war was
against the Argives. And as he was leading his army from Tegea into
Argolis, the Argives sent an envoy to negotiate peace with him on the
old conditions established among all Dorians. But he not only declined
these proposals, but advanced with his army and ravaged Argolis. And
there was an earthquake, but not even then would Agesipolis draw off
his forces, though these tokens of Poseidon’s displeasure frightened
the Lacedæmonians especially, [and also the Athenians.] And Agesipolis
was now encamped under the walls of Argos, and the earthquakes ceased
not, and some of the soldiers died struck by lightning, and others were
dismayed by the thunder. So at last he returned from Argolis sorely
against his will, and led an expedition against the Olynthians, and
having been successful in battle, and taken most of the other cities in
Chalcidice, and hoping to take Olynthus also, he was carried off by a
sudden disease and died.




CHAPTER VI.


And Agesipolis having died childless, the succession devolved upon
Cleombrotus, under whom the Lacedæmonians fought against the Bœotians
at Leuctra, and Cleombrotus, exposing himself too freely, fell at the
commencement of the action. Somehow or other the Deity seems to like to
remove the General first in great reverses, as from the Athenians he
removed Hippocrates (the son of Ariphron) their General at Delium, and
later on Leosthenes their General in Thessaly.

  The elder son of Cleombrotus, Agesipolis, did nothing worthy of
record, and Cleomenes the younger succeeded after his brother’s death.
And he had two sons, of whom the eldest Acrotatus died before his
father, and when later on the younger Cleomenes died, there was a
dispute who should be king between Cleonymus the son of Cleomenes and
Areus the son of Acrotatus. The Senate decided that to Areus the son
of Acrotatus and not to Cleonymus belonged the hereditary office.
And Cleonymus got mightily enraged at being ejected from the kingdom,
though the Ephors endeavoured to induce him by various honours, and
by making him commander-in-chief of the army, not to be an enemy to
his country. But in spite of this he eventually injured his country in
various ways, and even went so far as to invite in Pyrrhus the grandson
of Æacus.

  And during the reign of Areus the son of Acrotatus, Antigonus the
son of Demetrius made an expedition against Athens both by land and
sea. And an Egyptian fleet under Patroclus came to the aid of the
Athenians, and the Lacedæmonians came out in full force with Areus the
king at their head. And Antigonus having closely invested Athens, and
barring the Athenian allies from every approach to the city, Patroclus
sent messengers and begged the Lacedæmonians and Areus to begin the
battle against Antigonus, and when they began he said he would fall on
the rear of the Macedonians, for it was not reasonable that his force
should attack the Macedonians first, being Egyptians and sailors. Then
the Lacedæmonians were eager to bear the brunt of the battle, being
animated by their friendship to the Athenians, and the desire to do
something that posterity would not willingly forget. But Areus, as
their provisions had been consumed, led his army home again. For he
thought it sheer madness not to husband their resources, but lavish
them all on strangers. And Athens holding out for a very long time,
Antigonus made peace on conditions that he might have a garrison at the
Museum. And some time after Antigonus himself withdrew the garrison
there. And Areus had a son Acrotatus, and he had a son Areus, who
was only 8 when he fell sick and died. And as now Leonidas was the
only male left of the family of Eurysthenes, though quite an old man,
the Lacedæmonians made him king. And it so chanced that Lysander, a
descendant of Lysander the son of Aristocritus, especially disliked
Leonidas. He associated with himself Cleombrotus, the son in law of
Leonidas, and having won him over brought against Leonidas various
charges, and the oath he had sworn to Cleonymus his father while quite
a boy that he would destroy Sparta. So Leonidas was deposed from the
kingdom, and Cleombrotus reigned in his room. And if Leonidas had given
way to temper, and (like Demaratus the son of Aristo) had gone and
joined the king of Macedonia or the king of Egypt, he would have got
no advantage from the subsequent repentance of the Spartans. But as it
was when the citizens exiled him he went to Arcadia, and from thence
not many years afterwards the Lacedæmonians recalled him, and made him
king the second time. And all that Cleomenes the son of Leonidas did,
and all his boldness and bravery, and how the Spartan kings came to an
end with him, I have previously recorded in connection with Aratus of
Sicyon. Nor did I omit the details of Cleomenes’ death in Egypt.




CHAPTER VII.


Of the family of Eurysthenes then, called the Agiadæ, Cleomenes the son
of Leonidas was the last king at Sparta: but as to the other branch
this is what I have heard. Procles the son of Aristodemus had a son
called Sous, whose son Eurypon attained such glory that the family were
called Eurypontidæ from him, though till his time they were called
Proclidæ. And Eurypon had a son Prytanis, and it was in his days that
animosity broke out between the Lacedæmonians and Argives, and even
earlier than this quarrel they fought with the Cynurians, but during
the succeeding generations, when Eunomus the son of Prytanis and
Polydectes the son of Eunomus were kings, Sparta continued at peace.
But Charillus the son of Polydectes ravaged the Argive territory, and
made a raid into Argolis, and under his leadership the Spartans went
out to Tegea, when the Lacedæmonians hoped to take Tegea and slice the
district off from Arcadia, following a beguiling oracle. And after the
death of Charillus Nicander his son succeeded to the kingdom, and it
was in his reign that the Messenians killed Teleclus the king of the
other family in the temple of Artemis Limnas. And Nicander invaded
Argolis with an army, and ravaged most of the country. And the Asinæans
having taken part with the Lacedæmonians in this expedition, not
long afterwards paid the penalty to the Argives in the destruction of
their country and their own exile. And Theopompus the son of Nicander,
who was king after his father, I shall make mention of when I come
to the history of Messenia. During his reign came on the contest for
Thyrea between the Lacedæmonians and Argives. Theopompus himself took
no part in this, partly from old age, but still more from sorrow at
the death of his son Archidamus. Not that Archidamus died childless,
for he left a son Zeuxidamus, who was succeeded in the kingdom by his
son Anaxidamus. It was in his reign that the Messenians evacuated
the Peloponnese, having been a second time conquered in war by the
Spartans. And Anaxidamus had a son Archidamus, and he had a son
Agesicles: and both of them had the good fortune to spend all their
life in peace and without wars. And Aristo the son of Agesicles having
married a girl who they say was the most shameless of all the girls in
Lacedæmon, but in appearance the most beautiful girl next to Helen,
had by her a son Demaratus seven months after marriage. And as he was
sitting with the ephors in council a servant came and told him of the
birth of his son. And Aristo, forgetting the lines in the Iliad[31]
about the birth of Eurystheus, or perhaps not knowing them, said it
couldn’t be his child from the time. He was sorry afterwards for these
words which he had spoken. And when Demaratus was king and in other
respects in good repute at Sparta, and had cooperated with Cleomenes in
freeing the Athenians from the Pisistratidæ, this thoughtless word of
Aristo, and the hatred of Cleomenes deprived him of the kingdom. And he
went to Persia to king Darius, and they say his descendants continued
for a long time in Asia. And Leotychides, who became king in his
place, shared with the Athenians and their General Xanthippus, the son
of Ariphron, in the action at Mycale, and also marched into Thessaly
against the Aleuadæ. And though he might have reduced all Thessaly,
as he was victorious in every battle, he allowed the Aleuadæ to buy
him off. And being impeached at Lacedæmon he went voluntarily into
exile to escape trial, and became a suppliant at Tegea at the temple of
Alean Athene there, and as his son Zeuxidamus had previously died of
some illness, his grandson Archidamus succeeded him, on his departure
to Tegea. This Archidamus injured the Athenian territory excessively,
invading Attica every year, and whenever he invaded it he went through
all the country ravaging it, and also captured after a siege the town
of Platæa which was friendly to the Athenians. Not that Platæa had
ever stirred up strife between the Peloponnesians and Athenians, but
as far as in its power lay had made them both keep the peace. But
Sthenelaidas, one of the Ephors, a man of great power at Lacedæmon, was
mainly the cause of the war at that time. And this war shook Greece,
which was previously in a flourishing condition, to its foundation, and
afterwards Philip the son of Amyntas reduced it completely, when it was
already rotten and altogether unsound.




CHAPTER VIII.


And on the death of Archidamus, Agis the elder of his sons being of
age succeeded, and not Agesilaus. And Archidamus had also a daughter
called Cynisca, who was most ambitious in regard to the races at
Olympia, and was the first woman who trained horses, and the first
woman who won the prize at Olympia, though after her several women,
especially Lacedæmonian ones, won the prize at Olympia, though none
came up to her fame in these contests. But the Spartans seem to me
to admire least of all men the glory that proceeds from poetry, for
except an epigram on Cynisca composed by some one or other, and
still earlier one on Pausanias, composed by Simonides, inscribed on
the tripod erected at Delphi, there is no record made by any poet
on any of the Lacedæmonian kings. And in the reign of Agis, the son
of Archidamus, the Lacedæmonians brought other charges against the
people of Elis, but were especially annoyed at their being shut out
of the contest at Olympia, and the privileges of the temple there.
They therefore sent an envoy with an ultimatum to the people of Elis,
bidding them allow the people of Lepreum, and all other resident
aliens who were subject to them, to live according to their own laws.
And the people of Elis making reply that, when they saw the subject
cities of Sparta free, they would immediately set their own free, the
Lacedæmonians under King Agis at once invaded Elis. On that occasion
the army retired in consequence of an earthquake, when they had
advanced as far as Olympia and the River Alpheus, but next year Agis
wasted the country and carried off much booty. And Xenias a man of
Elis, who was privately friendly to Agis and publicly a champion of the
Lacedæmonians, conspired against the populace with the men who were
wealthy, but before Agis and the army could come up and cooperate with
them Thrasydæus, who was at this time the leader of the populace at
Elis, conquered Xenias and his faction in battle and drove them from
the city. And when Agis led his army home again, he left Lysistratus
the Spartan with a portion of his force, and the refugees from Elis,
to cooperate with the men of Lepreum in ravaging the district. And in
the third year of the war the Lacedæmonians and Agis made preparations
to invade Elis: but the people of Elis and Thrasydæus, who had been
reduced by the war to the greatest extremity, made a convention to give
liberty to their subject cities, and to raze the fortifications of
their town, and to allow the Lacedæmonians to sacrifice to the god at
Olympia and to contend in the games. After this Agis kept continually
attacking Attica, and fortified Decelea as a constant menace to the
Athenians: and after the Athenian fleet was destroyed at Ægos-potamoi,
Lysander the son of Aristocritus and Agis violated the solemn oaths
which the Lacedæmonians and Athenians had mutually sworn to observe,
and at their own responsibility, and not at the bidding of the Spartan
community, made an agreement with their allies to cut off Athens root
and branch. These were the most notable exploits of Agis in war. And
the hastiness of speech of Aristo about the legitimacy of his son
Demaratus Agis also imitated in regard to his son Leotychides, for
some evil genius put it into his head in the hearing of the Ephors to
say that he did not think he was his son. He repented however of his
speech afterwards, for when he was carried home sick from Arcadia and
had got to Heræa, he solemnly declared before a multitude of witnesses
that he did verily believe that Leotychides was his son, and conjured
them with entreaties and tears to report what he had said to the
Lacedæmonians. But after his death Agesilaus drove Leotychides from the
kingdom, reminding the Lacedæmonians of Agis’ former speech, though
the Arcadians came from Heræa, and bare witness what they had heard
about Leotychides from Agis on his death-bed. And the variance between
Agesilaus and Leotychides was heightened by the oracle at Delphi, which
ran as follows:--

    “Sparta, beware, although thou art so great,
    Of having king o’er thee lame of one leg.
    For unexpected woes shall then prevail,
    And mortal-slaying wave of troublous war.”

Leotychides said that this oracle referred to Agesilaus, for he
limped on one leg, but Agesilaus said it referred to Leotychides’ not
being the legitimate son of Agis. And the Lacedæmonians did not avail
themselves of their privilege to refer the question to Delphi: but
Lysander, the son of Aristocritus, seems to have prevailed upon the
people to unanimously choose Agesilaus.




CHAPTER IX.


So Agesilaus the son of Archidamus was king, and the Lacedæmonians
resolved to cross over into Asia with their fleet to capture Artaxerxes
the son of Darius: for they had learnt from several people in
authority, and especially from Lysander, that it was not Artaxerxes
that had helped them in the war against the Athenians, but Cyrus who
had supplied them with money for their ships. And Agesilaus, after
being instructed to convey the expedition to Asia as commander of the
land forces, sent round the Peloponnese to all the Greeks except at
Argos and outside the Isthmus urging them to join him as allies. The
Corinthians for their part, although they had been most eager to take
part in the expedition to Asia, yet, when their temple of Olympian Zeus
was suddenly consumed by fire, took it as an evil omen, and remained
at home sorely against their will. And the Athenians urged, as pretext
for refusing their aid, the strain of the Peloponnesian war and the
city’s need of recovery from the plague: but their having learnt from
envoys that Conon the son of Timotheus had gone to the great king,
was their main motive. And Aristomenidas was sent as ambassador to
Thebes, the father of Agesilaus’ mother, who was intimate with the
Thebans, and had been one of the judges who, at the capture of Platæa,
had condemned the garrison to be put to the sword. The Thebans however
cried off like the Athenians, declining their aid. And Agesilaus,
when his own army and that of the allied forces was mustered and his
fleet ready to sail, went to Aulis to sacrifice to Artemis, because it
was there that Agamemnon had propitiated the goddess when he led the
expedition to Troy. And Agesilaus considered himself king of a more
flourishing state than Agamemnon, and that like him he was leading all
Greece, but the success would be more glorious, the happiness greater,
to conquer the great King Artaxerxes, and to be master of Persia,
than to overthrow the kingdom of Priam. But as he was sacrificing
some Thebans attacked him, and threw the thigh-bones of the victims
that were burning off the altar, and drove him out of the temple. And
Agesilaus was grieved at the non-completion of the sacrifice, but none
the less he crossed over to Asia Minor and marched for Sardis. Now
Lydia was at this period the greatest province in Lower Asia Minor,
and Sardis was the principal city for wealth and luxury, and it was
the chief residence of the satrap by the sea, as Susa was the chief
residence of the great king. And fighting a battle with Tissaphernes,
the satrap of Ionia, in the plain near the river Hermus, Agesilaus
defeated the Persian cavalry and infantry, though Tissaphernes’ army
was the largest since the expedition of Xerxes against Athens, and
earlier still the expedition of Darius against the Scythians. And the
Lacedæmonians, delighted at the success of Agesilaus by land, readily
made him leader of the fleet also. And he put Pisander his wife’s
brother, a very stout soldier by land, in command of the triremes. But
some god must have grudged his bringing things to a happy conclusion.
For when Artaxerxes heard of the victorious progress of Agesilaus,
and how he kept pushing on with his army, not content with what he
had already gained, he condemned Tissaphernes to death, although he
had in former times done him signal service, and gave his satrapy
to Tithraustes, a longheaded fellow and very able man, who greatly
disliked the Lacedæmonians. Directly he arrived at Sardis, he forthwith
devised means to compel the Lacedæmonians to recall their army from
Asia Minor. So he sent Timocrates a native of Rhodes into Greece with
money, bidding him stir up war against the Lacedæmonians in Greece.
And those who received Timocrates’ money were it is said Cylon and
Sodamas among the Argives, and at Thebes Androclides and Ismenias and
Amphithemis: and the Athenians Cephalus and Epicrates had a share, and
the Corinthians with Argive proclivities as Polyanthes and Timolaus.
But the war was openly commenced by the Locrians of Amphissa. For the
Locrians had some land which was debated between them and the Phocians,
from this land the Phocians, at the instigation of the Thebans and
Ismenias, cut the ripe corn and drove off cattle. The Phocians also
invaded Locris in full force, and ravaged the territory. Then the
Locrians invited in the Thebans as their allies, and laid Phocis
waste. And the Phocians went to Lacedæmon and inveighed against the
Thebans, and recounted all that they had suffered at their hands. And
the Lacedæmonians determined to declare war against the Thebans, and
among other charges which they brought against them was their insult at
Aulis to the sacrifice of Agesilaus. And the Athenians, having heard of
the intention of the Lacedæmonians, sent to Sparta, begging them not
to war against Thebes, but to submit their differences to arbitration.
And the Lacedæmonians angrily dismissed the embassy. And what happened
subsequently, _viz._ the expedition of the Lacedæmonians and the death
of Lysander, has been told by me in reference to Pausanias. And what
is known to history as the Corinthian war began with this march into
Bœotia of the Lacedæmonians, and grew into a big war, and compelled
Agesilaus to bring his army home from Asia Minor. And when he had
crossed over in his ships from Abydos to Sestos, and marched into
Thessaly through Thrace, the Thessalians attempted to bar his way to
ingratiate themselves with the Thebans, partly also in consequence
of their long standing friendship with Athens. And Agesilaus having
routed their cavalry marched through Thessaly, and then through Bœotia,
having conquered the Thebans and their allies at Coronea. And when the
Bœotians were routed, some of them fled to the temple of Athene Itonia:
and though Agesilaus was wounded in the battle, he did not for all that
violate their sanctuary.




CHAPTER X.


And not long afterwards those Corinthians who had been exiled for their
Lacedæmonian proclivities established the Isthmian games. But those who
were at this time in Corinth remained there from fear of Agesilaus,
but when he broke up his camp and returned to Sparta, then they also
joined the Argives at the Isthmian games. And Agesilaus came again to
Corinth with an army: and, as the festival of Hyacinthus was coming on,
he sent home the natives of Amyclæ, to go and perform the customary
rites to Apollo and Hyacinthus. This detachment were attacked on the
road and cut to pieces by the Athenians under Iphicrates. Agesilaus
also marched into Ætolia to help the Ætolians who were hard pressed by
the Acarnanians, and compelled the Acarnanians to bring the war to an
end, when they had all but taken Calydon and the other fortified towns
in Ætolia. And some time afterwards he sailed to Egypt, to the aid of
the Egyptians who had revolted from the great king: and many memorable
exploits did he in Egypt. And he died on the passage home, for he was
now quite an old man. And the Lacedæmonians, when they got his dead
body, buried it with greater honours than they had shewn to any of
their kings.

  And during the reign of Archidamus, the son of Agesilaus, the
Phocians seized the temple of Apollo at Delphi. Offers of mercenary
aid came privately to the Thebans to fight against the Phocians, and
publicly from the Lacedæmonians and Athenians, the latter remembering
the old kindnesses they had received from the Phocians, and the
Lacedæmonians under pretext of friendship, but really as I think in
hostility to the Thebans. And Theopompus, the son of Damasistratus,
said that Archidamus also had a share of the money at Delphi, and that
also Dinichas, his wife, had received a bribe from the authorities of
the Phocians, and that all this made Archidamus more willing to bring
the Phocians aid. I do not praise receiving sacred money, and assisting
men who made havoc of the most famous of oracles. But this much I can
praise. The Phocians intended to kill all the young men at Delphi, and
to sell the women and children into slavery, and to raze the city to
its foundations: all this Archidamus successfully deprecated. And he
afterwards crossed over into Italy, to assist the people of Tarentum in
a war with their barbarian neighbours: and he was slain there by the
barbarians, and his dead body failed to find a tomb through the wrath
of Apollo. And Agis, the elder son of this Archidamus, met his death
fighting against the Macedonians and Antipater. During the reign of
Eudamidas the younger one the Lacedæmonians enjoyed peace. All about
his son Agis, and his grandson Eurydamidas, I have already related in
my account of Sicyonia.

  Next to the Hermæ[32] is a place full of oak trees, and the name of
it Scotitas (_dark place_) was not derived from the thickness of the
foliage, but from Zeus surnamed Scotitas, whose temple is about 10
stades as you turn off the road to the left. And when you have returned
to the road, and gone forward a little, and turned again to the left,
there is a statue and trophy of Hercules: Hercules erected the trophy
it is said after killing Hippocoon and his sons. And a third turn from
the high road to the right leads to Caryæ and the temple of Artemis.
For Caryæ is sacred to Artemis and the Nymphs, and there is a statue of
Artemis of Caryæ in the open air, and here the Lacedæmonian maidens
have a festival every year, and hold their national dances. And as you
return to the high road and go straight on you come to the ruins of
Sellasia, which place (as I have mentioned before) the Achæans reduced
to slavery, when they had conquered in battle the Lacedæmonians and
their king Cleomenes the son of Leonidas. And at Thornax, which you
next come to, is a statue of Pythæan Apollo, very similar to the one
at Amyclæ, which I shall describe when I come to Amyclæ. But the one
at Amyclæ is more famous than the Lacedæmonian one, for the gold which
Crœsus the Lydian sent to Pythæan Apollo was used to adorn it.




CHAPTER XI.


On going forward from Thornax, you come to the city which was
originally called Sparta, but afterwards Lacedæmon, which was once
the name of the whole district. And according to my rule which I laid
down in my account about Attica, not to give everything in detail
but to select what was most worthy of account, so I shall deal in my
account of Sparta: for I determined from the outset to pick out the
most remarkable of the particulars which tradition hands down. From
this determination I shall on no occasion deviate. At Sparta there is
a handsome market-place, and a council chamber for the Senate, and
public buildings in the market-place for the Ephors and guardians of
the laws, and for those who are called the Bidiæi. The Senate is the
most powerful governing body in Sparta, but all these others take
part in the government: and the ephors and the Bidiæi are each five
in number, and are appointed to preside over the games of the young
men in the Platanistas and elsewhere, and the Ephors manage all other
important matters, and furnish one of their number as the Eponymus,
who like the magistrates of the same name at Athens presides over the
rest. But the most notable thing in the market-place is what they call
the Persian Portico, built of the spoils taken from the Medes: and in
time they have brought it to its present size and magnificence. And
there are on the pillars statues in white stone of Mardonius, the son
of Gobryas, and other Persians. There is also a statue of Artemisia,
the daughter of Lygdamis, who was Queen of Halicarnassus: and who they
say of her own accord joined Xerxes in the expedition against Greece,
and displayed great valour in the sea fight at Salamis. And there are
two temples in the market-place, one to Cæsar, who was the first of the
Romans that aimed at Autocracy, and established the present régime, and
the other to Augustus his _adopted_ son, who confirmed the Autocratic
rule, and advanced further in consideration and power even than Cæsar
had done. His name Augustus has the same signification as the Greek
Sebastus. At the altar of Augustus they exhibit a brazen statue of
Agias, who they say foretold Lysander that he would capture all the
Athenian fleet at Ægos-potamoi but ten triremes: they got off safe to
Cyprus, but the Lacedæmonians took all the rest and their crews. This
Agias was the son of Agelochus, the son of Tisamenus. This last was a
native of Elis of the family of the Iamidæ, who was told by the oracle
that he should win the prize in 5 most notable contests. So he trained
for the pentathlum at Olympia, and came off the ground unvictorious
in that, though he won the prize in two out of the five, for he beat
Hieronymus of Andros in running and leaping. But having been beaten by
him in wrestling, and losing the victory, he interpreted the oracle to
mean that he would win five victories in war. And the Lacedæmonians,
who were not ignorant of what the Pythian priestess had foretold
Tisamenus, persuaded him to leave Elis, and carry out the oracle for
the benefit of the Spartans. And Tisamenus had his five victories,
first at Platæa against the Persians, and secondly at Tegea in a battle
between the Lacedæmonians and the people of Tegea and the Argives. And
next at Dipæa against all the Arcadians but the Mantinæans: (Dipæa is a
small town of the Arcadians near Mænalia.) And the fourth victory was
at Ithome against the Helots that had revolted in the Isthmus. However
all the Helots did not revolt, but only the Messenian portion who had
separated themselves from the original Helots. But I shall enter into
all this more fully hereafter. After this victory the Lacedæmonians,
listening to Tisamenus and the oracle at Delphi, allowed the rebels
to go away on conditions. And the fifth victory was at Tanagra in a
battle against the Argives and Athenians. Such is the account I heard
about Tisamenus. And the Spartans have in their market-place statues
of Pythæan Apollo, and Artemis, and Leto. And this place is called
Dance-ground because during the Festival of Gymnopædia,[33] (and there
is no feast more popular among the Lacedæmonians,) the boys have dances
here in honour of Apollo. And at no great distance are temples of
Earth, and Market Zeus, and Market Athene, and Poseidon whom they call
Asphalius, and Apollo again, and Hera. There is also a huge statue
of a man to represent the People of Sparta. And the Destinies have
a temple at Sparta, near to which is the tomb of Orestes the son of
Agamemnon: for they say his bones were brought from Tegea and buried
here in accordance with the oracle. And near the tomb of Orestes is
an effigy of Polydorus the son of Alcamenes, whom of all their kings
they so extolled that the government seal all their public documents
with Polydorus’ image. There is also a Market Hermes carrying a little
Dionysus, and some antiquities called Ephorea, and among them memorials
of Epimenides the Cretan, and of Aphareus the son of Perieres. And I
think the Lacedæmonian account of Epimenides truer than the Argive one.
Here also are statues of the Destinies, and some other statues. There
is also a Hospitable Zeus and a Hospitable Athene.




CHAPTER XII.


As you go from the market-place on the road which they call
Apheta (_starting-place_), you come to what is called Booneta,
(_Ox-purchased_). I must first explain the name of the road. They say
that Icarius proposed a race for the suitors of Penelope, and that
Odysseus won the prize is clear, and they started they say at the road
called Apheta. And I think Icarius imitated Danaus in proposing this
contest. For this was Danaus’ plan in regard to his daughters; as no
one would marry any of them because of their atrocious crime, Danaus
made it known that he would marry his daughters to any one who should
select them for their beauty without requiring wedding-presents, but
when only a few came to apply he established a race, and the winner
might take his pick of the girls, and the second the next, and so on to
the last in the race: and the girls still remaining had to wait for a
second batch of suitors and a second race. And what the Lacedæmonians
call Booneta on this road, was formerly the house of king Polydorus:
and after Polydorus’ death they bought it of his widow for some oxen.
For as yet there was no coinage either in silver or gold, but in
primitive fashion they gave in barter oxen and slaves, and silver or
gold in the lump. And mariners to India tell us the Indians give in
exchange for Greek commodities various wares, but do not understand
the use of money, and that though they have plenty of gold and silver.
And opposite the public Hall of the Bidiæi is the temple of Athene,
and Odysseus is said to have put there the statue of the goddess, and
called it Celeuthea, when he outran the suitors of Penelope. And he
built three temples of Celeuthea at some distance from one another.
And along the road called Apheta there are hero-chapels of Iops, who
is supposed to have been a contemporary of Lelex or Myles, and of
Amphiaraus the son of Œcles, (and this last they think the sons of
Tyndareus erected as Amphiaraus was their uncle), and also one of Lelex
himself. And not far from these is the shrine of Tænarian Apollo,
for that is his title, and at no great distance a statue of Athene,
which they say was a votive offering of those who migrated to Italy
and Tarentum. And the place which is called Hellenium is so called
because those of the Hellenes (_Greeks_), who strove to prevent Xerxes’
passing into Europe, deliberated in this place how they should resist
him. But another tradition says that it was here that those who went
to Ilium to oblige Menelaus deliberated on the best plan for sailing
to Troy, and exacting punishment of Paris for the rape of Helen. And
near Hellenium they exhibit the tomb of Talthybius: as do also the
people of Ægæ in Achaia in their market-place, who also claim the tomb
of Talthybius as being with them. And the wrath of this Talthybius for
the murder of the envoys, who were sent by King Darius to Greece to ask
for earth and water, was publicly manifested to the Lacedæmonians, but
on the Athenians was visited privately, and mainly on the house of one
man, Miltiades the son of Cimon, for he was the person responsible for
getting the envoys that came to Attica put to death by the Athenians.
And the Lacedæmonians have an altar of Apollo Acritas, and a temple
of Earth called Gaseptum, and above it is Apollo Maleates. And at the
end of the road Apheta, and very near the walls, is the temple of
Dictynna, and the royal tombs of the Eurypontidæ. And near Hellenium
is the temple of Arsinoe, the daughter of Leucippus, and the sister
of the wives of Polydeuces and Castor. And at what is called Garrison
there is a temple of Artemis, and as you go on a little further there
is a monument erected to the prophets from Elis who are called Iamidæ.
And there is a temple of Maro and Alpheus, who, of the Lacedæmonians
that fought at Thermopylæ, seem to have been reckoned most valiant
next to Leonidas. And the temple of Victory-giving Zeus was erected by
the Dorians, after a victory over the people of Amyclæ and the other
Achæans, who at this time occupied Laconia. And the temple of the great
Mother is honoured especially. And next to it are hero-chapels of
Theseus, and the Arcadian Aulon, and the son of Tlesimenes: some say
that Tlesimenes was the brother, others the son, of Parthenopæus the
son of Melanion.

  And there is another outlet from the market-place, where is built the
place called Scias, where even now they hold meetings. This Scias was
they say built by the Samian Theodorus, who was the first discoverer
of fusing, and making statues, in iron. Here the Lacedæmonians hung
up the harp of Milesian Timotheus, censuring him for adding four
chords in harpistry to the old Seven. And near Scias there is a round
building (in which are statues of Olympian Zeus and Olympian Aphrodite)
constructed they say by Epimenides, of whom they give a different
account to that of the Argives, since they say that the Argives never
fought with the Gnossians.




CHAPTER XIII.


Not far from Scias is the tomb of Cynortas the son of Amyclas, and the
monument of Castor, and a temple to him over it. Castor and Pollux were
not they say reckoned gods till the fortieth year after the battle
between Idas and Lynceus, whose tombs are exhibited at Scias, though a
more probable tradition states that they were buried in Messenia. But
the misfortunes of the Messenians, and the long time they were away
from the Peloponnese, have made many of their old traditions unknown
to posterity, and since they do not themselves know them for certain,
any one who chooses can doubt. Right opposite the temple of Olympian
Aphrodite the Lacedæmonians have a temple of Saviour Proserpine,
erected some say by the Thracian Orpheus, others say by Abaris who
came from the Hyperboreans. And Carneus, whom they surname Œcetes, had
honours in Sparta even before the return of the Heraclidæ, and a statue
was erected to him in the house of Crius, the son of Theocles the
prophet. As the daughter of this Crius was drawing water, some Dorian
spies met her and had a conversation with her, and went to Crius, and
learnt of him the way to capture Sparta. And the worship of Carnean
Apollo was established among all the Dorians by Carnus, an Acarnanian
by race and the prophet of Apollo: and when he was slain by Hippotes
the son of Phylas the heavy wrath of Apollo fell upon the camp of the
Dorians, and Hippotes had to flee for this murder, and the Dorians
determined to propitiate the Acarnanian prophet by sacred rites. But
indeed it is not this Carnean Œcetes, but the son of the prophet Crius
that was honoured while the Achæans still held Sparta. It has indeed
been written by Praxilla in her verses that Carneus was the son of
Europa, and that Apollo and Leto brought him up. But there is another
tradition recorded of him, that the Greeks cut down on Trojan Ida some
cornel trees that grew in the grove of Apollo to make the Wooden Horse:
and when they learnt of the anger of the god against them for this
sacrilege, they propitiated him with sacrifices and called him Carnean
Apollo from these cornel trees, transposing the letter ρ according to
ancient custom.[34]

  And not far from Carnean Apollo is the statue of Aphetæus: where
they say the suitors of Penelope started for their race. And there is
a place which has porticoes forming a square, where nicknacks in old
times used to be sold: at this place is an altar of Ambulian Zeus and
Ambulian Athene, and also of Ambulian Castor and Pollux. And right
opposite is what is called Colona (_Hill_), and a temple of Zeus of
Colona, and near it the grove of the hero, who they say showed Dionysus
the way to Sparta. And the women called Dionysiades and Leucippides
sacrifice to this hero before they sacrifice to the god himself. But
the other eleven women, whom they also call Dionysiades, have a race
specially appointed for them: this custom came from Delphi. And not far
from the temple of Dionysus is that of Zeus Euanemus, and on the right
of this is the hero chapel of Pleuron. On the mother’s side the sons
of Tyndareus were descended from Pleuron, for Areus says in his poems
that Thestius, the father of Leda, was the son of Agenor and grandson
of Pleuron. And not far from this hero chapel is a hill, and on the
hill is a temple of Argive Hera, erected they say by Eurydice the
daughter of Lacedæmon, and the wife of Acrisius the son of Abas. And
the temple of Hyperchirian Hera was built according to the oracle, when
the Eurotas overflowed a considerable part of the country. And the old
wooden statue they call that of Aphrodite Hera, and when a daughter is
married it is customary for mothers to sacrifice to that goddess. And
on the road to the right of this hill is an effigy of Etœmocles. He and
his father Hipposthenes won prizes for wrestling at Olympia, the father
on eleven occasions, the son on twelve.




CHAPTER XIV.


As you go westwards from the market-place is the cenotaph of Brasidas
the son of Tellis, and at no great distance a theatre in white stone
well worth seeing. And opposite the theatre are the tombs of Pausanias
the General at Platæa, and of Leonidas: and every year they have
speeches over them, and a contest in which none but Spartans may
compete. The remains of Leonidas were 40 years after his death removed
from Thermopylæ by Pausanias, and there is a pillar with the names and
pedigree of those who fought against the Medes at Thermopylæ. And there
is in Sparta a place called Theomelida, where are the tombs of the
kings descended from Agis, and at no great distance is what is called
the Lounge of the Crotani; who belong to the Pitanatæ. And not far from
this Lounge is the temple of Æsculapius, called the temple among the
tombs of the descendants of Agis. And as you go on you come to the tomb
of Tænarus, from whom they say the promontory Tænarum gets its name.
And there are temples of Hippocurian Poseidon and Æginetan Artemis.
And as you retrace your steps to the Lounge is the temple of Artemis
Issora, they also call her Limnæa, though she is not called Artemis
but Britomartis by the Cretans, but about her I shall speak when I
come to Ægina. And very near the tombs of the descendants of Agis you
will see a pillar, and inscribed on it are the victories which Chionis
a Lacedæmonian carried off in the course, and others which he won at
Olympia. For there he had seven victories, four in the course, and
three in the double course. The shield race at the end of the sports
was not then instituted. Chionis also took part they say with Theræan
Battus in founding Cyrene, and in ejecting the neighbouring Libyans.
And they allege the following as the reason why the temple of Thetis
was built. When they were fighting against the Messenians who had
revolted, and their king Anaxander invaded Messenia and took captive
some women, and among them Cleo the priestess of Thetis, Anaxander’s
wife Leandris begged Cleo of her husband, and she found Cleo in
possession of a wooden statue of Thetis, and joined her in building a
temple to the goddess: and Leandris built this according to the pattern
which she saw in a dream: and the old wooden statue of Thetis they
keep in a private place. And the Lacedæmonians say they were taught
to worship Demeter Chthonia by Orpheus, but I am of opinion that the
temple at Hermion taught them this worship of Demeter Chthonia. The
Spartans have also a very recent temple of Serapis, and another of
Olympian Zeus.

  And the Lacedæmonians give the name Dromus to the place where it is
customary still for the young men to practise in running. As you go to
this Dromus from the tomb of the descendants of Agis you see on the
left hand the sepulchre of Eumedes, who was the son of Hippocoon, and
an old statue of Hercules, to whom the Spartan youths called _Sphærei_
sacrifice. This name is given to the lads who are just growing to
manhood.[35] There are also gymnasiums in Dromus, one the offering of
the Spartan Eurycles. And outside Dromus, and opposite the statue of
Hercules, is a house which now belongs to a private person, but was of
old the house of Menelaus. And as you go on from Dromus you come to the
temples of Castor and Pollux, and the Graces, and Ilithyia, and Carnean
Apollo, and Sovereign Artemis. And on the right of Dromus is a temple
of Æsculapius surnamed Agnitas (_Willowy_), because the god’s statue
is made of willow, of the same kind as that called rhamnus: and at no
great distance is a trophy, which they say Polydeuces put up after his
victory over Lynceus. And this confirms in my opinion the probability
that the sons of Aphareus were not buried at Sparta. Near the beginning
of Dromus are Castor and Pollux of the _Startingpoint_, and as you go
a little way further is the hero-chapel of Alco, who they say was the
son of Hippocoon. And next to the hero-chapel of Alco is the temple
of Poseidon whom they surname Domatites. And there is a place called
Platanistas from the plane-trees which grow high and continuous round
it. And this place, where it is customary for the young men to have
their fights, is surrounded by water as an island is by the sea, and
you enter it by bridges. On one side of these bridges is a statue of
Hercules, and on the other one of Lycurgus, who not only legislated
for the state generally but even for the fights of the youths. And the
youths have the following customs also. They sacrifice before their
fights in the temple of Phœbus, which is outside the city and not very
far from Therapne. Here each division of the young men sacrifice a
puppy dog to Enyalius,[36] deeming the most valiant of domesticated
animals a suitable victim to the most valiant of the gods. And I know
no other Greeks who are accustomed to sacrifice puppy dogs except the
Colophonians, who sacrifice a black puppy to Enodius. The sacrifices
both of the Colophonians and also of these young men at Lacedæmon take
place by night. And after their sacrifice the young men pit together
tame boars to fight, whichever boar gets the victory, the party to
which it belongs are generally victorious at Platanistas. This is what
they do in the temple of Phœbus: and on the next day a little before
noon they cross the bridges to Platanistas. And the approach for each
division is appointed by lot the night before. And they fight with
hands and feet, and bite and tear one another’s eyes out. So they
fight, and violently attack one another full tilt, and push one another
into the water.




CHAPTER XV.


Near Platanistas there is a hero-chapel of Cynisca, the daughter of
Archidamus king of Sparta: she was the first woman who trained horses,
and the first woman who won the chariot-race at Olympia. And behind
the portico near Platanistas are several other hero-chapels, one of
Alcimus, and another of Enaræphorus, and at no great distance one of
Dorceus, and above this one of Sebrus. These they say were sons of
Hippocoon. And from Dorceus they call the fountain near the hero-chapel
Dorcea, and from Sebrus they call the place Sebrium. And on the right
of Sebrium is the sepulchre of Alcman, the sweetness of whose poems
was not injured by the Lacedæmonian dialect, though it is the least
euphonious. And there are temples of Helen and Hercules, hers near
the tomb of Alcman, and his very near the walls with a statue in it
of Hercules armed: Hercules was so represented in the statue they say
because of his fight against Hippocoon and his sons. The animosity of
Hercules against the family of Hippocoon originated they say in that,
after killing Iphitus, when he came to Sparta to clear himself, they
refused to clear him. The following matter also contributed to the
beginning of strife. Œonus a lad, and nephew of Hercules, for he was
the son of Alcmena’s brother, accompanied Hercules to Sparta, and as
he was going round and looking at the city, when he was opposite the
house of Hippocoon, a watch dog jumped out on him, and Œonus chanced
to throw a stone and hit the dog. Then the sons of Hippocoon ran out,
and struck Œonus with clubs till they had killed him. At this Hercules
was furious against Hippocoon and his sons, and immediately (so angry
was he) attacked them. For the moment he retired as he was wounded, but
afterwards he brought others with him to Sparta to avenge himself on
Hippocoon and his sons for the murder of Œonus. And the sepulchre of
Œonus was erected near the temple of Hercules. And as you go eastwards
from Dromus there is a path on the right hand to the temple of Athene
under the title of Exactor of due punishment. For when Hercules took
on Hippocoon and his sons adequate vengeance for what they had done,
he built this temple to Athene under the title of Exactor of due
punishment, for the old race of men called revenge punishment.[37]
And there is another temple of Athene as you go on another road from
Dromus, erected they say by Theras the son of Autesion, the son of
Tisamenus, the son of Thersander, when he sent a colony to the island
which is now called Thera after him, but was of old called Calliste.
And hard by is the temple of Hipposthenes who carried off most of the
wrestling prizes, and whom they worship according to the oracle, as
if they were awarding honours to Poseidon. And right opposite this
temple is Enyalius in fetters, an old statue. And the opinion of the
Lacedæmonians about this statue and about that of the Athenians called
Wingless Victory is the same, _viz._ that Enyalius will never depart
from the Lacedæmonians as being fettered, just as Victory will always
remain with the Athenians because she has no wings to fly away. Athens
and Lacedæmon have erected these statues on similar principles and with
a similar belief. And at Sparta there is a Lounge called _the Painted
Lounge_, and various hero-chapels near it, as of Cadmus the son of
Agenor, and his descendants, Œolycus the son of Theras, and Ægeus the
son of Œolycus. And they say these hero-chapels were built by Mæsis,
Læas, and Europas, who are said to have been the sons of Hyræsus and
grandsons of Ægeus. And they built also a hero-chapel to Amphilochus,
because their ancestor Tisamenus was the son of Demonassa, the sister
of Amphilochus. And the Lacedæmonians are the only Greeks with whom it
is customary to call Hera Goateater and to sacrifice goats to her. And
Hercules they say built a temple and sacrificed goats to her first,
because when he was fighting against Hippocoon and his sons he met
with no obstacle from Hera, though he thought the goddess opposed him
on all other occasions. And they say he sacrificed goats to her as
being in difficulty about getting any other victims. And not far from
the theatre is the temple of Tutelary Poseidon and hero-chapels of
Cleodæus the son of Hyllus, and of Œbalus. And the most notable of the
Spartan temples of Æsculapius is at Booneta, on the left of which is
the hero-chapel of Teleclus, of whom I shall give an account when I
come to Messenia. And when you have gone forward a little further there
is a hill not very high, and on it an old temple and wooden statue of
Aphrodite in full armour. This is the only temple I know which has
an upper story built above it, and in this upper story is a shrine
of Aphrodite under the title of The Shapely, the goddess is seated
with a veil on and fetters on her feet. They say Tyndareus added the
fetters, symbolising by those bonds the bonds of love, that unite men
so powerfully to women. For as to the other tradition, that Tyndareus
punished the goddess by fetters, because he thought his daughters’
disgrace had come from the goddess, this I don’t at all accept: for
it would have been altogether childish to make a small figure of
cedar-wood and call it Aphrodite, and then think in punishing it one
was punishing the goddess!




CHAPTER XVI.


And hard by is the temple of Hilaira and Phœbe, who the writer of the
Cyprian poems says were the daughters of Apollo. And their priestesses
are maidens, called also Leucippides as well as the goddesses. One of
their statues was touched up by a priestess of the goddesses, who with
an art not unknown in our days put a new face on the old statue, but
a dream prevented her treating the other statue in the same way. Here
is hung up an egg, fastened to the roof by fillets; they say it is the
egg which Leda is said to have laid. And every year the women weave a
coat for Apollo at Amyclæ, and they call the place where they weave it
_Coat_. Near the temple is a house which they say the sons of Tyndareus
originally lived in, but afterwards Phormio a Spartan got possession
of it. To him Castor and Pollux came as strangers, they said they had
come from Cyrene and desired to lodge at his house, and asked for a
chamber, (with which they were greatly pleased), as long as they should
remain at Sparta. But he bade them go to some other house where they
might like to dwell, he could not give them that chamber, for it was
the apartment of his daughter a maiden. And the next day maiden and
her attendants had all vanished, but statues of Castor and Pollux were
found in the chamber, and a table with some assa-fœtida on it. Such at
least is the tradition.

  And as you go to the gates from the place called _Coat_ there is a
hero-chapel of Chilo, who was accounted one of the seven wise men, and
of an Athenian hero who accompanied Dorieus, the son of Anaxandrides,
on the expedition to colonize Sicily. And they put in at Eryx thinking
that district belonged to the descendants of Hercules, and not to
barbarians who really held it. For there is a tradition that Eryx
and Hercules wrestled on the following conditions, that if Hercules
conquered the land of Eryx should be his, but if Eryx conquered the
oxen of Geryon, (which Hercules was then driving,) should be his, for
these oxen had swum across to Sicily from the promontory at Scylla,[38]
and Hercules had crossed over after them to find them, and Eryx should
have them if he came off victor. But the good will of the gods did not
speed Dorieus the son of Anaxandrides as it had done Hercules, for
Hercules killed Eryx, but the people of Segeste nearly annihilated
Dorieus and his army. And the Lacedæmonians have built a temple to
their legislator Lycurgus as to a god. And behind this temple is the
tomb of Eucosmus, the son of Lycurgus, near the altar of Lathria and
Anaxandra, who were twins, (and the sons of Aristodemus who married
them were also twins), and the daughters of Thersander the son of
Agamedidas, the king of the Cleestonæans, and the great grandson of
Ctesippus the son of Hercules. And right opposite the temple are the
tombs of Theopompus the son of Nicander, and Eurybiades, who fought
against the Medes in the Lacedæmonian gallies at Artemisium and
Salamis. And hard-by is what is called the hero-chapel of Astrabacus.

  And the place called Limnæum is the temple of Orthian Artemis. The
wooden statue of the goddess is they say the very one which Orestes
and Iphigenia formerly stole from the Tauric Chersonese. And the
Lacedæmonians say it was brought to their country when Orestes was
king there. And their account seems to me more probable than the
account of the Athenians. For why should Iphigenia have left the
statue at Brauron? And when the Athenians were preparing to leave the
place, would they not have put it on board ship? And so great still is
the fame of Tauric Artemis, that the Cappadocians who live near the
Euxine claim that the statue was theirs, and the Lydians who have a
temple of Anaitian Artemis make the same claim. But it appears it was
neglected by the Athenians and became a prey to the Medes: for it was
carried from Brauron to Susa, and afterwards the Syrians of Laodicea
received it from Seleucus and still have it. And the following facts
plainly prove to me that the Orthian Artemis at Lacedæmon is the same
wooden statue which was taken from the barbarians: that Astrabacus
and Alopecus, (the sons of Irbus, the son of Amphisthenes, the son of
Amphicles, the son of Agis), when they found the statue immediately
went mad; and also that the Limnatæ among the Spartans, and the people
of Cynosura, Mesoa, and Pitane, who were sacrificing to Artemis, had
a quarrel and even went so far as to kill one another, and after many
were killed at the altar a pestilence destroyed the rest. And after
that an oracle bade them sprinkle human blood over the altar. And
instead of a person drawn by lot being sacrificed, Lycurgus changed it
to flogging the young men there, and so the altar got sprinkled with
human blood. And the priestess stands by during the operation, holding
the wooden statue, which is generally light from its smallness, but
if the scourgers spare any young man at all in his flogging either
on account of his beauty or rank, then this wooden statue in the
priestess’ hand becomes heavy and no longer easy to hold, and she makes
complaint of the scourgers and says it is so heavy owing to them. So
innate is it with this statue, in consequence of the sacrifices at
the Tauric Chersonese, to delight in human blood. And they not only
call the goddess Orthia, but also _Bound-with-willow-twigs_, because
the statue was found in a willow bush, and the willows so tenaciously
twined round it that they kept it in an upright posture.




CHAPTER XVII.


And not far from that of Orthian Artemis is the temple of Ilithyia:
this temple they say was built, and Ilithyia accounted a goddess,
in obedience to the oracle at Delphi. And the Lacedæmonians have no
citadel rising to a notable height, as the Cadmea at Thebes, or Larissa
among the Argives: but as there are several hills in the city the
highest of these is called the citadel. Here is erected a temple of
Athene called Poliuchus and Chalciœcus. And this temple began to be
built they say by Tyndareus: and after his death his sons wished to
finish the building, and they had an opportunity in the spoils from
Aphidna. But as they too died before the conclusion of the work, the
Lacedæmonians many years afterwards completed the temple, and made a
statue of Athene in brass. And the artificer was Gitiadas a native
of Sparta, who also composed Doric poems and a hymn to the goddess.
Many too of the Labours of Hercules are delineated in brass, and many
of his successes on his own account, and several of the actions of
Castor and Pollux, and their carrying off the daughters of Leucippus,
and Hephæstus freeing his mother from her bonds. I have given an
explanation of all these before, and the legends about them, in my
account of Attica. There too are the Nymphs giving Perseus, as he is
starting for Libya and Medusa, the invisible cap, and the sandals with
which he could fly through the air. There too are representations of
the birth of Athene, and of Amphitrite, and Poseidon, which are the
largest and as it seems to me finest works of art.

  There is also another temple there of Athene the Worker. At the South
Porch there is also a temple of Zeus called the Arranger, and the tomb
of Tyndareus in front of it. And the West Porch has two Eagles and two
Victories to correspond, the votive offering of Lysander, and a record
of his two famous exploits, the one near Ephesus when he defeated
Antiochus, the pilot of Alcibiades, and the Athenian gallies, and
the other at Ægos-potamoi where he crushed the Athenian navy. And at
the left of Athene Chalciœcus they have built a temple of the Muses,
because the Lacedæmonians do not go out to battle to the sound of the
trumpet, but to the music of flutes and lyre and harp. And behind
Athene Chalciœcus is the temple of Martial Aphrodite. Her wooden
statues are as old as any among the Greeks.

  And on the right of Athene Chalciœcus is a statue of Supreme Zeus,
the most ancient of all brass statues, for it is not carved in one
piece, but forged piece by piece and deftly welded together, and studs
keep it together from falling to pieces. The artificer was they say
Clearchus a man of Rhegium, who some say was the pupil of Dipœnus and
Scyllis, others say of Dædalus. And at what is called the _Scenoma_
there is a figure of a woman, the Lacedæmonians say it is Euryleonis,
who won the prize at Olympia with a pair of horses.

  And near the altar of Athene Chalciœcus are erected two figures of
Pausanias the General at Platæa. His fate I shall not relate to people
who know it, for what I have written before is quite sufficient. I
shall merely therefore state what I heard from a man of Byzantium, that
Pausanias was detected plotting, and was the only one of those that
took sanctuary with Athene Chalciœcus that did not get indemnity, and
that for no other reason than that he could not clear himself of the
guilt of murder. For when he was at the Hellespont in command of the
allied fleet, he got enamoured of a Byzantian maiden called Cleonice,
and at nightfall a detachment of his men brought her to him. And
Pausanias had fallen asleep, and when this maiden came into the room
she knocked down inadvertently the light that was burning, and the
noise woke him. And Pausanias, whose conscience smote him for having
betrayed Greece, and who was therefore always in a state of nervous
alarm and panic, was beside himself and stabbed the maiden with a
scimetar. This guilt Pausanias could not clear himself from, though
he endeavoured in every way to propitiate Zeus the Acquitter, and
even went to Phigalia in Arcadia to the necromancers, but he paid to
Cleonice and the deity the fit penalty. And the Lacedæmonians at the
bidding of the oracle made brazen statues for the god Epidotes, and
otherwise honoured him, because he it was who in the case of Pausanias
turned aside the wrath of Zeus the god of Suppliants.




CHAPTER XVIII.


Near the two figures of Pausanias is a statue of Youth-prolonging
Aphrodite, made at the bidding of an oracle, and statues of Sleep and
Death. People have reckoned them to be brothers according to Homer’s
lines in the Iliad.[39] And on the way to Alpium as it is called you
come to the temple of Athene the Eye-preserver, erected they say by
Lycurgus who had one of his eyes knocked out by Alcander, because he
did not find Lycurgus’ legislation agreeable. And he took refuge at
this place, and the Lacedæmonians prevented his losing his remaining
eye, so he built a temple to Athene the Eye-preserver. And as you go
on from thence you come to the temple of Ammon. The Lacedæmonians seem
from time immemorial to have used his oracle in Libya most of all
the Greeks. And it is said that, when Lysander was besieging Aphytis
in Pallene, Ammon appeared to him by night, and told him it would be
better for him and Lacedæmon to raise the siege. And accordingly he
did so, and induced the Lacedæmonians to honour the god even more
than before. And the people of Aphytis honour Ammon as much as the
Ammonians themselves in Libya. And the following is the tradition about
Cnagian Artemis. Cnageus they say was a native of Sparta, and went on
the expedition against Aphidna with Castor and Pollux, and was taken
prisoner in the battle and sold into slavery in Crete, and was slave at
the temple of Artemis in Crete, and in course of time ran off with the
priestess who also took with her the image of the goddess. This is why
they call her Cnagian Artemis. But I cannot help thinking this Cnageus
must have gone to Crete in some other way, and not as the Lacedæmonians
say, for I do not think a battle was fought at Aphidna, as Theseus
was detained in Thesprotia, and the Athenians were not unanimous for
him, but inclined rather to Menestheus. Not but that, if a contest
took place, one might readily believe that prisoners were taken by the
conquerors, especially as it was a decisive victory, for Aphidna was
captured. Let this suffice for the subject.

  On the road from Sparta to Amyclæ you come to the river Tiasa. Tiasa
was they think the daughter of Eurotas, and near the river is a temple
of the Graces Phaenna and Clete, whom Alcman has celebrated. And they
think that Lacedæmon erected this temple to the Graces and gave them
these names. The things worth seeing at Amyclæ are the statue of
Ænetus on a pillar (he won all the prizes in the pentathlum, and died
they say directly after being crowned for his victory at Olympia,) and
some brazen tripods, three[40] of which are older they say than the
Messenian War. Under the first of these is a statue of Aphrodite, under
the second one of Artemis, both the design and work of Gitiadas. And
the third is by Callon of Ægina, and under it is a statue of Proserpine
the daughter of Demeter. And the Parian Aristander has represented a
woman with a lyre to signify Sparta no doubt, and Polycletus the Argive
has represented Aphrodite called the Aphrodite near Amyclæan Apollo.
These 3 tripods are bigger than any of the rest, and were dedicated in
consequence of the victory at Ægos-potamoi. And Bathycles the Magnesian,
who made the throne of Amyclæan Apollo, also carved some of the Graces
on the throne and a statue of Artemis Leucophryene. Who he learnt his
art from, or in whose reign he made this throne I pass by, but I have
seen it and will describe it. Before and behind it are two Graces and
two Seasons, on the left is the Hydra and Typhos, and on the right the
Tritons. But to narrate every detail of this work of art would tire my
readers, to make therefore a short summary, since most are well known,
Poseidon and Zeus are carrying off Taygetes, the daughter of Atlas,
and her sister Alcyone. There also is Atlas delineated, and the combat
between Hercules and Cycnus, and the fight of the Centaurs with Pholus.
There too is the Minotaur represented by Bathycles (I know not why) as
fettered and led alive by Theseus. And there is a dance of Phæacians
on the throne, and Demodocus is singing. There too is Perseus’ victory
over Medusa. And not to mention the contest of Hercules with the giant
Thurius, and of Tyndareus with Eurytus, there is the rape of the
daughters of Leucippus. And there is Hermes carrying to heaven Dionysus
as a boy, and Athene taking Hercules to dwell among the gods. And
there is Peleus handing over Achilles for his education to Chiron, who
is said to have been his tutor. And there is Cephalus carried off by
Aurora for his beauty. And there are the gods bringing their gifts at
the wedding of Harmony. There too is the single combat between Achilles
and Memnon, and Hercules slaying Diomede, King of Thrace, and Nessus
by the river Evenus, and Hermes bringing up the goddesses to Paris
for the trial of beauty, and Adrastus and Tydeus stopping the fight
between Amphiarus and Lycurgus the son of Pronax. And Hera is gazing at
Io already changed into a heifer, and Athene is running away from the
pursuit of Hephæstus. There too is Hercules fighting with the hydra,
and bringing up Cerberus from Hades. There too are Anaxis and Mnasinous
each of them on horseback, and Megapenthes, the son of Menelaus, and
Nicostratus both on one horse. And there is Bellerophon killing the
Chimæra in Lycia, and Hercules driving off the cattle of Geryon. And on
each side of the upper portions of the throne are Castor and Pollux on
horseback: under their horses are some Sphinxes and some wild beasts
running above, on Castor’s side a leopard, but near Pollux a lioness.
And at the very top of the throne is a company of the Magnesians who
assisted Bathycles in this work of art. And if you go under the throne
to see its interior parts where the Tritons are, there is the boar
of Calydon, and Hercules slaying the sons of Actor, and Calais and
Zetes driving away the Harpies from Phineus, and Pirithous and Theseus
carrying off Helen, and Hercules throttling the Nemean lion. And there
are Apollo and Artemis transfixing Tityus. And there is the contest of
Hercules with the Centaur Oreus, and of Theseus with the Minotaur, and
the wrestling of Hercules with Achelous, and Hera bound by Hephæstus as
the story goes, and the games established by Acastus in memory of his
father, and what we read in the Odyssey about Menelaus and the Egyptian
Proteus. Lastly there is Admetus yoking to his chariot a boar and a
lion, and the Trojans making their offerings at the grave of Hector.




CHAPTER XIX.


As to the seat for the god on this throne, it is not one continuous
surface but has several partitions with intervals between them. The
largest partition is in the middle, where there is a statue about 30
cubits high I conjecture, for no one has taken its measure. And this is
not by Bathycles but an ancient and inartistic production, for except
the face toes and hands it resembles a brazen pillar. There is a helmet
on its head, and a lance and bow in its hands. And the base of the
statue is like an altar, and they say Hyacinthus is buried there, and
at the festival of Hyacinthus, before they sacrifice to Apollo, they
make offerings to Hyacinthus on this altar through a brazen door which
is on the left of the altar. And carved upon this altar are effigies
of Biris and Amphitrite and Poseidon, and Zeus and Hermes talking
together, and near them Dionysus and Semele, and near Semele Ino. On
this altar too are effigies of Demeter and Proserpine and Pluto, the
Destinies and the Seasons, Aphrodite and Athene and Artemis; and they
are carrying to heaven Hyacinthus and his sister Polybœa who they say
died a virgin. Hyacinthus has a small beard, and Nicias the son of
Nicomedes has represented him as very handsome, hinting at the love
of Apollo for him. There is also a representation of Hercules being
taken to heaven by Athene and the other gods; as also effigies of the
daughters of Thestius and the Muses and the Seasons. As to the Zephyr,
and the story of Hyacinth having been accidentally slain by Apollo, and
the legends about the flower Hyacinth, the traditions may possibly be
baseless, but let them stand.

  Amyclæ was destroyed by the Dorians, and is now only a village,
which contains a temple and statue of Alexandra well worth seeing, (by
Alexandra the people of Amyclæ mean Cassandra the daughter of Priam).

  There is here also an effigy of Clytæmnestra, and a statue of
Agamemnon, and his supposed tomb. And Amyclæan Apollo and Dionysus are
the chief gods worshipped here, the latter they call very properly in
my opinion Psilax (_Winged_). Psila is the Dorian word for wings, and
wine elevates men and lightens their judgment just as wings elevate
birds. And such is all that is memorable about Amyclæ.

  Another road from Sparta leads to Therapne. And on the way is a
wooden statue of Athene Alea. And before you cross the Eurotas a little
above the bank stands the temple of Wealthy Zeus. And when you have
crossed the Eurotas, you come to the temple of Cotylean Æsculapius
built by Hercules, who called Æsculapius Cotylean because in the
first conflict with Hippocoon and his sons he received a wound on his
_cotyle_ or hip. And of all the temples built on this road, the most
ancient is one of Ares, on the left of the road, and the statue of the
god was they say brought by Castor and Pollux from Colchi. And Theritas
gets its name they say from Thero, who was the nurse of Ares. And
perhaps they got the name Theritas from the Colchians, for the Greeks
know nothing of a nurse of Ares called Thero. But I cannot but think
that the name Theritas was given to Ares not on account of his nurse,
but because in an engagement with the enemy one must be mild no longer,
but be like the description of Achilles in Homer, “as a lion he knows
savageness.”[41]

  Therapne got its name from Therapne, the daughter of Lelex, and it
has a temple of Menelaus, and they say that Menelaus and Helen were
buried here. But the Rhodians have a different account to that of the
Lacedæmonians, and say that Helen after the death of Menelaus, while
Orestes was still on his travels, was driven away by Nicostratus and
Megapenthes and went to Rhodes, as she was a connection of Polyxo the
wife of Tlepolemus, for Polyxo was of Argive descent, and being the
wife of Tlepolemus fled with him to Rhodes, and there became Queen,
being left with one fatherless child. This Polyxo they say desired
to avenge on Helen the death of Tlepolemus, and when she got her in
her power sent to her as she was bathing some attendants dressed like
the Furies, and they laid hold of Helen and hung her on a tree, and
for this reason the Rhodians have a temple to Helen Hung on the Tree.
And I will record the tradition of the people of Croton about Helen,
which is the same as that of the people of Himera. There is in the
Euxine sea, near the mouth of the Ister, an island sacred to Achilles
called Leuce. It is 20 stades in extent, entirely thick forest and full
of beasts domesticated and wild, and contains a temple and statue of
Achilles. They say Leonymus of Croton was the first that ever sailed
to it. For when there was a war between the people of Croton and the
Locrians in Italy, and the Locrians invited in Ajax the son of Oileus
to aid them because of their kinsmanship to the Opuntians, Leonymus the
general of the Crotonians attacked that part of the enemy’s army where
he was told that Ajax was stationed, and got wounded in the breast,
and, as he suffered very much from his wound, went to Delphi. And the
Pythian Priestess sent him to the island Leuce, and told him that Ajax
would appear there and heal his wound. And in process of time getting
well he returned from Leuce, and said that he had seen Achilles, and
Ajax the son of Oileus, and Ajax the son of Telamon, and that Patroclus
and Antilochus were in the company, and that Helen was married to
Achilles and had told him to sail to Himera, and tell Stesichorus
that the loss of his eyesight was a punishment to him from her. In
consequence of this Stesichorus composed his palinode.




CHAPTER XX.


At Therapne too I saw the fountain Messeis. Some of the Lacedæmonians
say that the fountain called in our day Polydeucea, and not this one
at Therapne, was called by the ancients Messeis. But the fountain
Polydeucea, and the temple of Polydeuces, are on the right of the road
to Therapne. And not far from Therapne is a temple of Phœbus, and in
it a shrine of Castor and Polydeuces, and the youths sacrifice here
to Enyalius. And at no great distance is a temple of Poseidon under
the name of the Earth-holder. And as you go on thence on the road to
Taygetus you come to a place they call Alesiæ (_i.e._ _Mill-town_),
for they say that Myles the son of Lelex was the first that discovered
the use of mills, and first ground here. At Alesiæ there is a
hero-chapel to Lacedæmon the son of Taygete. And as you go on from
thence and cross the river Phellias, on the road from Amyclæ to the sea
you come to Pharis, formerly a populous town in Laconia, and leaving
the river Phellias on the right is the way to Mount Taygetus. And there
is in the plain a shrine of Messapian Zeus. He got this title they say
from one of his priests. As you go thence towards Mount Taygetus there
is a place called Bryseæ, where was formerly a town, and there is still
a temple of Dionysus and his statue in the open air. But the statue in
the temple only women may look upon: and women only conduct the ritual
in connection with the sacrifices. The highest point of Mount Taygetus
is Taletum above Bryseæ. This they say is sacred to the Sun, and they
sacrifice there to the Sun horses and other victims, as do also the
Persians. And not far from Taletum is the forest called Evoras, which
supports several wild beasts and especially wild goats. In fact Mount
Taygetus throughout affords excellent goat-hunting and boar-hunting,
and superfine deer-hunting and bear-hunting. And between Taletum and
Evoras is a place they call Theras, where they say Leto came from
the heights of Taygetus. And there is a temple to Demeter under the
name Eleusinia. Here the Lacedæmonians say Hercules was hidden by
Æsculapius, while he was being cured of his wound. And there is in
it a wooden statue of Orpheus, the work as they say of the Pelasgi.
And I know that Orphic rites take place here also. Near the sea is a
town called Helus, which Homer has mentioned in his catalogue of the
Lacedæmonians,

    ‘Those who dwelt at Amyclæ and Helus the city by the sea.’[42]

It was founded by Heleus the youngest son of Perseus, and the Dorians
in after days reduced it by siege. Its inhabitants were the first
slaves of the Lacedæmonian commonalty, and were the first called Helots
from the place of their birth. Afterwards Helot was the general name
the Dorians gave their slaves, even when they were Messenians, just
as all the Greeks are called Hellenes from Hellas in Thessaly. From
Helus they bring on stated days the wooden statue of Proserpine, the
daughter of Demeter, to Eleusinium. And 15 stades from Eleusinium is
the place called Lapithæum from a native called Lapithus. It is on
Mount Taygetus, and not far from it is Dereum, where is a statue of
Derean Artemis in the open air, and near it a fountain which they call
Anonus. And next to Dereum, about 20 stades further on is Harplea,
which extends as far as the plain.

  On the road from Sparta to Arcadia there is a statue of Athene called
Parea in the open air, and near it a temple of Achilles, which it is
customary to keep shut. But those of the youths who intend to contend
at Platanistas are wont to sacrifice there to Achilles before the
contest. And the Spartans say this temple was built for them by Prax,
who was the great grandson of Pergamus, the son of Neoptolemus. And
as you go on you come to the tomb called _The Horse_, for Tyndareus
sacrificed a horse here and put an oath to all the suitors of Helen,
making them stand by the horse’s entrails. And the oath was to aid
Helen, and whoever should be chosen for her husband, if they were
wronged. And after putting this oath to them he buried the remains of
the horse here. And at no great distance there are seven pillars set
there after some ancient custom, I suppose, to represent the seven
planets. And on the road there is a grove of Carnean Apollo called
Stemmatius, and a temple of Mysian Artemis. And the statue of Modesty,
about 30 stades’ distance from Sparta, is the votive offering of
Icarius, said to have been made on the following occasion. When Icarius
gave Penelope in marriage to Odysseus, he endeavoured to persuade
Odysseus to live at Lacedæmon, but failing in that he begged his
daughter to remain with him, and when she set out for Ithaca followed
the chariot, and besought her earnestly to return. And Odysseus for a
time refused his consent to this, but at last gave Penelope permission
either to accompany him of her own volition, or to go back to Lacedæmon
with her father. And she they say made no answer, but, as she veiled
her face at this proposal, Icarius perceived that she wished to go off
with Odysseus, and let her go, and dedicated a statue of Modesty in
the very place in the road where they say Penelope had got to when she
veiled herself.




CHAPTER XXI.


And 20 stades further you will come to the Eurotas which flows very
near the road, and to the tomb of Ladas, who surpassed all his
contemporaries in swiftness of foot. At Olympia he received the prize
for the long race, but I think he was tired out after his victory, for
he died on this spot and was buried above the public road. Another
Ladas, who also was a victor at Olympia but not in the long race, was
they say an Achæan from Ægium, according to the archives of Elis about
the victors at Olympia. And if you go on you come to the village called
Characoma, and next to it is Pellana, formerly a town, where they
say Tyndareus lived, when he fled from Sparta from Hippocoon and his
sons. And the notable things I have myself seen there are the temple
of Æsculapius and the fountain Pellanis, into which they say a maiden
fell when she was drawing water, and after she had disappeared her veil
was found in another fountain called Lancea. And about 100 stades from
Pellana is a place called Belemina: best off for water of all Laconia,
for not only does the river Eurotas flow through it, but it has also
fountains in abundance.

  As you go down to the sea in the direction of Gythium, you come to
the Lacedæmonian village called Croceæ. The stonequarries here are not
one continuous piece of rock, but stones are dug out of them like river
stones, rather difficult to carve, but when they are carved admirably
adapted to adorn the temples of the gods, and add very greatly to the
beauty of fishponds and ornamental waters. And in front of the village
are statues of the gods, as Zeus of Croceæ in stone, and at the quarry
Castor and Pollux in brass. And next to Croceæ, as you turn to the
right from the high road to Gythium, you will come to the small town
called Ægiæ. They say Homer mentions it under the name Augeæ. Here is a
marsh which is called Poseidon’s marsh, and the god has a temple and
statue near it. The natives are afraid however to catch the fish, for
they say that whoever fishes there becomes a fish and ceases to be a
man.

  Gythium is about 30 stades from Ægiæ, and is near the sea, and is
inhabited by the Eleutherolacones, whom the Emperor Augustus liberated
from the yoke of slavery imposed on them by the Lacedæmonians of
Sparta. All the Peloponnese except the Isthmus of Corinth is surrounded
by water: and the maritime parts of Laconia furnish shell fish from
which purple dye is obtained, next in excellence to the Tyrian purple.
And the Eleutherolacones have 18 cities, first Gythium as you descend
from Ægiæ to the sea, and next Teuthrone, and Las, and Pyrrhichus,
and near Tænarum Cænepolis, and Œtylus, and Leuctra, and Thalamæ, and
Alagonia, and Gerenia: and opposite Gythium Asopus near the sea, and
Acriæ, and Bœæ, and Zarax, and Epidaurus called Limera, and Brasiæ,
and Geronthræ, and Marius. These are all that remain of what were once
24 cities of the Eleutherolacones. And the other six, which I shall
also give an account of, are tributary to Sparta and not independent
as those we have just spoken of. And the people of Gythium assign no
mortal as their founder, but say that Hercules and Apollo, when their
contest for the tripod was over, jointly built their town. In the
market-place they have statues of Apollo and Hercules, and near them
Dionysus. And in a different part of the town is Carnean Apollo, and a
temple of Ammon, and a brazen statue of Æsculapius; his shrine has no
roof to it, and there is a fountain of the god, and a temple sacred to
Demeter, and a statue of Poseidon the Earth-holder. And the person that
the people of Gythium call the old man, who they say lives in the sea,
is I discovered Nereus, and this name Homer gave him in the Iliad in
the speech of Thetis, ‘Ye now enter Ocean’s spacious bosom, to visit
the old man of the sea and the homes of our sire.’[43] And the gates
here are called Castorides, and in the citadel there is a temple and
statue of Athene.




CHAPTER XXII.


And about 3 stades from Gythium is the White Stone, where they say
Orestes sat to cure himself of his madness. In the Doric tongue the
stone was called Zeus Cappotas. And opposite Gythium lies the island
Cranae, where according to Homer Paris first carried off Helen. Facing
this island on the mainland is the temple of Aphrodite Migonitis, and
the whole place is called Migonium. The temple they say was built by
Paris. And Menelaus, returning home safe 8 years after the capture
of Ilium, placed near the temple of Aphrodite Migonitis statues of
Thetis and Praxidice. There is a mountain too above Migonium sacred to
Dionysus, which they call Larysium: and here at the commencement of
spring they have a feast to Dionysus, alleging among other reasons for
the festival that they found here a ripe cluster of grapes.

  On the left of Gythium about 30 stades’ distance you will see on
the mainland the walls of Trinasus, which seems to me to have been
a fort and not a town. And I think it got its name from the three
small islands which lie here near the mainland. And about 80 stades
from Trinasus you come to the ruins of Helus, and 30 stades further
to Acriæ a city on the sea, where is a handsome temple of the Mother
of the Gods, and her statue in stone. And the inhabitants of Acriæ
say that this is the oldest of all the temples of this goddess in the
Peloponnese: though the Magnesians who live north of Sipylus have on a
rock called Coddinus the most ancient statue of the Mother of the Gods;
and the Magnesians say it was made by Broteas the son of Tantalus.
Acriæ once produced a victor at Olympia in Nicocles, who carried off at
two Olympiads five victories in the chariot race. His tomb is between
the gymnasium and the walls near the harbour. It is about 120 stades
from Acriæ to Geronthræ. Geronthræ was inhabited before the Heraclidæ
came to the Peloponnese, and the inhabitants were driven out by the
Dorians of Lacedæmon, who, when they had driven out the Achæans from
Geronthræ, put in colonists of their own. But Geronthræ now belongs
to the Eleutherolacones. On the road from Acriæ to Geronthræ there
is a village called Palæa, and at Geronthræ there is a temple and
grove of Ares, whose festival they celebrate annually, when women are
forbidden to enter the grove. And near the market-place are fountains
of drinkable water. And in the citadel there is a temple of Apollo,
and the head of his image in ivory: all the rest of the image was
destroyed by fire when the old temple was burnt. Another town belonging
to the Eleutherolacones is Marius, 100 stades from Geronthræ. There is
an old temple there common to all the gods, and round it a grove with
fountains, there are also fountains in the temple of Artemis. Marius
indeed has plenty of water if any place. And above Marius is a village
called Glyptia in the interior of the country. And there is another
village called Selinus about 20 stades from Geronthræ.

  So much for the interior of Laconia from Acriæ. And the town Asopus
on the sea is about 60 stades from Acriæ. In it is a temple of the
Roman Emperors, and inland from Asopus about 12 stades is a temple of
Æsculapius, they call the god Philolaus there. And the bones that are
honoured in the gymnasium are exceedingly large, but not too big for
a mortal. And there is a temple of Athene called Cyparissia in the
citadel: and at the foot of the citadel there some ruins of a town
called the town of the Paracyparissian Achæans. There is also in this
district a temple of Æsculapius about 50 stades from Asopus, and they
call the place in which this temple is Hyperteleatum. And there is a
promontory jutting out into the sea about 200 stades from Asopus, which
they call _Ass’ jawbone_. This promontory has a temple of Athene,
without either statue or roof, said to have been built by Agamemnon.
There is also a monument of Cinadus, who was the pilot of Menelaus’
ship. And next to this promontory is what is called the Bay of Bœæ,
and the city Bœæ is at the head of the bay. It was built by Bœus, one
of the sons of Hercules who is said to have peopled it from the three
towns Etis, Aphrodisias, and Sida. Two of these ancient towns are
reputed to have been built by Æneas, when he was fleeing to Italy and
driven into this bay by storms, his daughter Etias gave her name to
Etis, and the third town was they say called after Sida the daughter
of Danaus. Those who were driven out of these towns enquired where
they should dwell: and the oracle told them that Artemis would shew
them where to dwell. On their starting their journey a hare sprung in
view, this hare they made their guide: and as it hid in a myrtle tree
they built their city on the site of the myrtle tree, and they still
venerate the myrtle tree, and call Artemis their Saviour. There is also
a temple of Apollo in the market-place of Bœæ, and in another part of
the city temples of Æsculapius and Serapis and Isis. The ruins of the
three towns are not more than 7 stades from Bœæ, and on the road you
see a stone statue of Hermes on the left, and among the ruins can trace
temples of Æsculapius and Hygiea.




CHAPTER XXIII.


And Cythera lies opposite Bœæ, and to the promontory of
Platanistus--the point where the island is nearest to the
mainland--from the promontory on the mainland called _Ass’ jaw-bone_
is about 4 stades’ sail. And at Cythera there is a station for ships
called Scandea, and Scandea is about 10 stades from the town of Cythera
as you go along the cliffs. And the temple of Celestial Aphrodite is
the most holy and most ancient of all the temples the Greeks have of
Aphrodite, and the statue is an old wooden one, the goddess is in
complete armour.

  As you sail from Bœæ to the promontory of Malea there is a harbour
called Nymphæum, and a statue of Poseidon erect, and a cave very near
the sea, and in it a spring of fresh water, and many people live in
the neighbourhood. And as you double the promontory of Malea, and sail
about 100 stades, you come to a place called Epidelium on the borders
of Bœæ, where is a temple of Apollo. It is called Epidelium because
the wooden statue of Apollo there now was formerly at Delos. For
Delos being formerly an emporium for the Greeks, and being thought
likely to give security to commerce because of the god, Menophanes a
General of Mithridates, either of his own insolence or obeying the
orders of Mithridates, (for to a man looking only to lucre divine
things come after gain), seeing that Delos had no fortifications and
that the inhabitants were unarmed, sailed to it and slew all the
resident aliens, and the Delians also, and robbed the merchants of much
money, and carried off all the votive offerings, and also enslaved
the women and children, and razed Delos to the ground. And during
the sack and plunder one of the barbarians in very wantonness threw
this wooden statue into the sea, and the waves landed it here at the
place called Epidelium in the district of Bœæ. But the fierce wrath
of the god failed not to pursue Menophanes and Mithridates himself,
for Menophanes, when he put to sea again after laying Delos waste, was
lain in wait for by the merchants who had escaped, and his vessel sunk,
and Mithridates subsequently was compelled by the god to be his own
executioner when his power was entirely destroyed, and he driven hither
and thither by the Romans. And some say that he found a violent death
as a favour at the hands of one of his mercenaries. Such was the end of
these men for their impiety.

  And adjacent to the district of Bœæ is Epidaurus Limera, about
200 stades from Epidelium. And they say that it was colonized and
inhabited not by the Lacedæmonians but by some Epidaurians that lived
in Argolis, who, sailing to Cos to see Æsculapius on public business
put in at Laconia here, and according to visions they had continued
here. And they say that the dragon which they had brought with them
from Epidaurus escaped from the ship and dived into a hole not far from
the sea, and according to their visions and the wonderful behaviour of
their dragon they determined to dwell there. And at the point where the
dragon dived into a hole they erected altars to Æsculapius, and some
olive trees grow in the vicinity. About two stades further there is
on the right hand some water called the water of Ino, in size only a
small lake, but it goes very deep into the ground. Into this water on
the festival of Ino they throw barley cakes. If the water absorbs them
it is thought a lucky sign for the person who throws them in, but if
they float on the surface it is judged a bad sign. The craters at Ætna
have the same prophetic power. For they throw into them gold and silver
vessels, and offerings of all kinds. And if the fire absorbs them they
rejoice at it as a good sign, but if it rejects them they regard it as
a sure sign of misfortune for the person who has thrown them in. And
on the road from Bœæ to Epidaurus Limera there is a temple of Artemis
called by the Epidaurians Limnas. The town is at no great distance from
the sea, and is built on an eminence: and the sights worth seeing here
are the temple of Aphrodite, and a statue of Æsculapius in stone erect,
and a temple of Athene in the citadel, and in front of the harbour
a temple of Zeus Soter. And into the sea near the town juts out the
promontory Minoa. And the bay is very similar to all the others in
Laconia made by the encroaches of the sea. And the seashore has pebbles
beautiful in shape and of all kinds of colours.




CHAPTER XXIV.


About 100 stades from Epidaurus Limera is Zarax, in other respects
convenient as a harbour, but especially ravaged of all the towns of
the Eleutherolacones, for Cleonymus, the son of Cleomenes, the son of
Agesipolis, razed to the ground this alone of the Laconian towns. But
I have elsewhere spoken of Cleonymus. And at Zarax there is nothing
remarkable but a temple of Apollo at the end of the harbour, and a
statue of the god with a lyre.

  And as you go along the coast from Zarax about 6 stades, and then
turn and strike into the interior of the country for about 10 stades,
you come to the ruins of Cyphanta, where is a temple of Æsculapius
called Stethæum, and the statue of the god is of stone. And there is
a spring of cold water bubbling out from the rock. They say Atalanta
was parched with thirst hunting here, and struck the rock with her
lance and the water gushed forth. And Brasiæ near the sea is the last
place which belongs to the Eleutherolacones here, and it is about
200 stades’ sail from Cyphanta. And the natives here have traditions
different to all the other Greeks, for they say that Semele bare a son
to Zeus, and that she and her son Dionysus were spirited away by Cadmus
and put into a chest, and this chest was they say carried by the waves
to Brasiæ, and they say they buried magnificently Semele who was no
longer alive, and reared Dionysus. And in consequence of this the name
of their city, which had been hitherto called Oreatæ was changed to
_Brasiæ_, because of this landing from the chest. To this day in fact
most people speak of things cast ashore by the waves as _brashed_[44]
ashore. The people of Brasiæ say further that Ino came to their land
on her travels, and when she came there wished to be the nurse of
Dionysus. And they show the cave where she reared Dionysus, and they
call the plain Dionysus’ garden. And there are temples of Æsculapius
and Achilles there, and they have an annual feast to Achilles. And
there is a small promontory at Brasiæ, which slopes gently to the sea,
and there are some brazen statues on it not more than a foot high with
hats on their heads, I know not whether they are meant for Castor and
Pollux or the Corybantes, however there are three figures, and there
is also a statue of Athene. And on the right of Gythium is Las, ten
stades from the sea, and forty from Gythium. And the town is now built
on the ground between the three mountains called respectively Ilium and
Asia and Cnacadium, but it was originally on the crest of Asia: and
there are still ruins of the old town, and before the walls a statue
of Hercules, and a trophy over the Macedonians, who were a portion of
Philip’s army when he invaded Laconia, but wandered from the rest of
the army, and ravaged the maritime parts of the country. And there is
among the ruins a temple of Athene under the title of Asia, erected
they say by Castor and Pollux on their safe return from Colchi, where
they had seen a temple of Athene Asia. I know that they took part in
the expedition with Jason, and that the Colchians honour Athene Asia
I have heard from the people of Las. And there is a fountain near the
new town called from the colour of its water Galaco (_milky_), and
near the fountain is a gymnasium, and an ancient statue of Hermes. And
on Mount Ilium there is a temple of Dionysus, and on the top of the
hill one of Æsculapius, and on Cnacadium Carnean Apollo. And if you
go forward about 30 stades from Carnean Apollo there are at a place
called Hypsi, on the borders of Sparta, temples of Æsculapius and of
Daphnean Artemis. And on a promontory near the sea is the temple of
Artemis Dictynna, whose feast they keep annually. And on the left of
this promontory the river Smenus discharges itself into the sea. The
water is fresh to drink, and rises on Mount Taygetus, and is not more
than five stades distant from Hypsi. And in the place called Araïnum is
the tomb of Las, and over his tomb a statue. This Las they say was the
founder of the town, and was killed by Achilles, who they say came to
their town to ask Helen in marriage of Tyndareus. But to speak truth it
was Patroclus that killed Las: for it was he that wooed Helen. For that
Achilles is not represented as one of Helen’s suitors in the Catalogue
of Women, would indeed be no proof that he did not ask for Helen’s
hand: but Homer has stated very early in the Iliad[45] that Achilles
went to Troy to gratify the sons of Atreus, and not bound by any oath
to Tyndareus, and has represented Antilochus in the Games saying
that he was younger than Odysseus,[46] and has described Odysseus as
discoursing about what he had seen in Hades and other things, and
how he wished to see Theseus and Pirithous, who were older men than
himself, and we know that Theseus ran away with Helen. So it is hardly
permissible at all to think that Achilles could have been a suitor of
Helen.




CHAPTER XXV.


Not far from the tomb of Las the river called Scyras falls into the
sea; it had no name for a long time and was called Scyras because
Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles, put in there with his fleet, when he
sailed from Scyrus to marry Hermione. And when you have crossed the
river there is an ancient temple at some distance from an altar of
Zeus. And at forty stades’ distance from the river is Pyrrhichus in
the heart of the country. Some say the town was so called from Pyrrhus
the son of Achilles, others say Pyrrhichus was the god of the Curetes.
There are some even that say Silenus came from Malea and dwelt here.
That Silenus was brought up at Malea is plain from these lines of
Pindar,[47]

    ‘The mighty, the dance-loving Silenus,
    Reared by the Malea-born husband of Nais.’

That Pyrrhichus was his name has not been told us by Pindar,
but is a tradition of those that live at Malea. And there is at
Pyrrhichus a conduit in the market-place, which they think they owe
to Silenus: and if the conduit were to fail them they would be short
of water. And the temples at Pyrrhichus are two, one of Artemis the
Putter-of-an-end-to-War, because here the Amazons were stopped from any
further warfare, and one of Apollo Amazonius. Both have wooden statues,
and tradition says they were votive offerings of the women that came
from Thermodon.

  As you go towards the sea from Pyrrhichus you come to Teuthrone,
which they say was built by Teuthras an Athenian. And of all the gods
they pay most honour to Issorian Artemis, and they have a fountain
called Naia. And a hundred and fifty stades from Teuthrone is the
promontory of Tænarum jutting out into the sea, and the harbours
Achilleus and Psamathus. And on the promontory there is a temple like a
cave, and before it a statue of Poseidon. And some of the Greeks have
represented that it was here that Hercules brought up Cerberus from
the lower world, though there is no underground road leading up to the
cave, nor could one easily believe that the gods have any underground
dwelling, where departed souls congregate. But Hecatæus the Milesian
has a probable legend, that a dreadful serpent called Cerberus was
reared at Tænarum, and that whoever was bitten by it was sure to die,
so venomous was its bite, and this serpent was dragged by Hercules to
Eurystheus. Homer, who first spoke of the dog being dragged from Hades
by Hercules, gave him no name, nor complete description as he did of
the Chimæra.[48] But others afterwards called the dog Cerberus, and
said he was like a dog in all respects except that he had 3 heads,
though Homer said no more that he was the domestic animal called the
dog than if he had called a real serpent the dog of Hades. There are
several works of art at Tænarum, and among others the harper Arion
in brass riding on the dolphin’s back. As to Arion and the dolphin
Herodotus[49] has given the tradition as he heard it in his history
about Lydia. I have myself seen at Poroselene a dolphin so full of
gratitude to a boy, by whom he had been healed of wounds received from
some fishermen, that he was obedient to his call, and carried him on
his back over the sea whenever he wished. There is also a fountain at
Tænarum, which now presents nothing marvellous, but in former times
they say gave to those who looked into it the sight of harbours and
ships. This peculiarity of the water was stopped for all time by a
woman’s washing her dirty linen in it.

  About 40 stades’ sail from the promontory of Tænarum is a place
called Cænepolis, which was also formerly called Tænarum. And in it
is a chapel of Demeter, and a temple of Aphrodite near the sea, and a
stone statue of the goddess erect. And 30 stades thence is Thyrides
the topmost peak of Tænarum, and the ruins of the town of Hippola, and
among them the temple of Athene of Hippola, and at a little distance
the town and harbour of Messa. It is about 150 stades from this harbour
to Œtylus. And the hero from whom Œtylus got its name was originally
from Argos, being the son of Amphianax, the son of Antimachus. The most
notable things to see in Œtylus are the temple of Serapis, and a wooden
statue in the market-place of Carnean Apollo.




CHAPTER XXVI.


From Œtylus to Thalamæ the distance by road is about 80 stades, and by
the roadside is a temple and oracle of Ino. They get their oracular
responses asleep, for whatever they want to know the goddess shews them
in dreams. And there are two brazen statues in the open air part of the
temple, one of Pasiphae, and one of the Sun. What the statue in the
temple is made of is not easy to see from the quantity of the garlands,
but they say that it too is of brass. And fresh water flows from a
sacred fount, called the water of the Moon. Pasiphae indeed is not the
indigenous goddess of the people of Thalamæ.

  And about twenty stades from Thalamæ is a place called Pephnos, by
the sea. There is a little island in front of it not greater than a big
rock, which is also called Pephnos, and the people of Thalamæ say that
it was the birthplace of Castor and Pollux. Alcman also gives us the
same account I know in one of his poems. But they do not say that they
were brought up at Pephnos, for Hermes took them to Pellana. And in
this island there are brazen statues of Castor and Pollux about a foot
high in the open air. These the sea cannot move from their position,
though in winter time it dashes violently over the rock. This is indeed
wonderful, and the ants there are whiter in colour than ants generally.
The Messenians say that the island originally belonged to them, so that
they claim Castor and Pollux as theirs rather than as deities of the
Lacedæmonians.

  About twenty stades from Pephnos is Leuctra. Why it was so called I
do not know: but if it was from Leucippus the son of Perieres, as the
Messenians say, this will be why they honour Æsculapius here most of
all the gods, as the son of Arsinoe the daughter of Leucippus. And
there is a statue of Æsculapius in stone, and one of Ino in another
part of the town. There is also a temple and statue of Cassandra the
daughter of Priam, who is called Alexandra by the people of Leuctra:
and there are some wooden statues of Carnean Apollo, who is worshipped
in the same way as by the Lacedæmonians at Sparta. And in the citadel
there is a temple and statue of Athene. And there is a temple and grove
of Eros, and in winter-time water flows through the grove: but the
leaves that fall from the trees in autumn could never be carried away
by the water even if it were very plentiful. But what I know happened
in my time at a part of Leuctra near the sea, I will now relate. The
wind fanned a fire in the wood so that it burnt down most of the trees:
and when the spot became bare, there was a statue of Ithomatan Zeus
discovered which had been erected there. The Messenians say that this
is a proof that Leuctra was originally part of Messenia. But Ithomatan
Zeus might have received honours from the Lacedæmonians as well, if
they originally lived at Leuctra.

  And Cardamyle, which Homer[50] has mentioned in the promises of
gifts made by Agamemnon, is subject to Sparta, as the Emperor Augustus
detached it from Messenia. It is eight stades from the sea, and sixty
from Leuctra. And not far from the seashore is a grove sacred to the
daughters of Nereus, for the story goes that they climbed up to this
place from the sea to see Pyrrhus the son of Achilles, when he went off
to Sparta to marry Hermione. In this small town there is a temple of
Athene and Carnean Apollo, whom they worship according to the Dorian
fashion.

  And the city called, by Homer[51] Enope, the inhabitants of which
are Messenians though they join the Council of the Eleutherolacones,
is called in our time Gerenia. Some say Nestor was brought up in this
city, others that he fled here when Pylos was taken by Hercules.
Gerenia contains the tomb and temple of Machaon the son of Æsculapius:
from whom men may have possibly learnt the healing of diseases. The
sacred place they call Rhodon, and the statue of Machaon is erect
in brass. And on its head is a garland, which the Messenians call
_ciphos_[52] in their country’s tongue. The writer of the epic poem
called the Little Iliad says that Machaon was killed by Eurypylus
the son of Telephus. That is why (as I myself know) in the rites in
the temple of Æsculapius at Pergamum, they begin with the Hymns of
Telephus, but make no reference in their singing to Eurypylus, nor
will they name him at all in the temple, because they know he was the
murderer of Machaon. And the tradition is that Nestor recovered the
bones of Machaon. And Podalirius, when the Greeks were returning after
the sack of Ilium, was carried they say out of his way to Syrnum a
place in the Continent of Caria, and getting there safe built a town
there.

  In the Gerenian district is the mountain Calathium, and on it is a
temple of Clæa and a grotto near the temple, with a narrow entrance:
within there are several objects worth seeing. And from Gerenia to
Alagonia in the interior is about 30 stades, but that town I have
already mentioned amongst the Eleutherolacones. And the sights best
worth seeing there are the temples of Dionysus and Artemis.




FOOTNOTES:

[30] _Odyssey_, xix. 178, 179.

[31] Iliad, xix. 117.

[32] Mentioned ii, 38; iii, i. Pausanias now returns to topography.

[33] _Gymnopædia_, as its name denotes, was a yearly festival at which
boys danced naked and went through gymnastic exercises.

[34] The cornel tree is in Greek κράνεια. Transposition of the ρ will
give κάρνειος as the title of the god. This will explain text.

[35] It means boxers, or football players.

[36] A name for Ares the god of war, the Latin Mars.

[37] So Bacon calls revenge ‘a kind of wild justice.’ _Essay_ iv.

[38] Reading the emendation of _Sylburgius_ κατὰ τὸ Σκύλλαιον τὴν ἄκραν.

[39] Iliad, xiv. 231.

[40] Reading τρεῖς with Facius.

[41] Iliad, xxiv. 41. Pausanias derives from Θήρ or Θηρίον.

[42] Iliad, ii. 584.

[43] Iliad, xviii. 140, 141.

[44] We coin a word to keep the Paronomasia.

[45] Iliad, i. 158-160.

[46] Is this a slip of Pausanias for _Menelaus_? See Iliad, xxiii. 587,
588.

[47] Only found as a fragment now.

[48] In Odyssey, xi. 623, he is simply called κύνα, in Iliad, viii.
368, κύνα στυγερoῦ Ἀΐδαο. And κύων has various senses.

[49] Herodotus, i. 23, 24.

[50] Iliad, ix. 292.

[51] Iliad, ix. 292.

[52] Our _coif_.




BOOK IV.--MESSENIA.




CHAPTER I.


The border of Messenia towards Laconia, as fixed by Augustus, is at
Gerenia, and in our time is called the Chœrian dell. This country,
originally without inhabitants, is described to have been inhabited
by the first colonists in the following manner. After the death of
Lelex, who reigned in what is now called Laconia, but was then called
Lelegia after him, Myles who was the elder of his sons succeeded him,
and Polycaon the younger was only a private person till he married
the Argive Messene, the daughter of Triopas, the son of Phorbas. But
Messene, being full of pride owing to her father, who was foremost of
all the Greeks in merit and power, did not think it tolerable that
her husband should be a private person. So they gathered together
an army from Argos and Lacedæmon and invaded this country, and the
whole district was called Messene from her. And several other cities
were built, as well as the place where the royal headquarters were
established, _viz._ Andania. Before the battle which the Thebans fought
with the Lacedæmonians at Leuctra, and the building of Messene in our
day close to Ithome, I know of no city that was previously called
Messene. My inference is very much confirmed by Homer. For in the
catalogue of those who went to Ilium, when enumerating Pylos and Arene
and other cities, he mentions no Messene. And in the Odyssey he shews
that by this time the Messenians were a race and not a city,

    ‘For the Messenians took cattle from Ithaca,’[53]

and clearer still in speaking of the bow of Iphitus,

    ‘They two in Messene met one another,
    In the house of Ortilochus.’[54]

By the house of Ortilochus in Messene he meant the town of Pheræ, as he
has shewn in the visit of Pisistratus to Menelaus,

    ‘They went to Pheræ to the house of Diocles,
    The son of Ortilochus.’[55]

  However the first rulers of this country were Polycaon (the son
of Lelex) and his wife Messene. Caucon, the son of Celænus, the son
of Phlyus, introduced here from Eleusis the mysteries of the Great
Goddesses. Phlyus was according to the Athenian tradition the son of
Mother Earth. And this tradition of theirs is confirmed by the Hymn of
Musæus made for the Lycomidæ in honour of Demeter. And the rites of
the Great Goddesses were held in greater honour many years afterwards,
owing to Lycus the son of Pandion, than in Caucon’s days. And they
still call the place where he purged the initiated the oak coppice of
Lycus. That there is an oak-coppice in this land called Lycus’ is also
borne out by Rhianus the Cretan,

    ‘By rocky Elæum and beyond the oak-coppice of Lycus.’

And that this Lycus was the son of Pandion is plain by the inscription
on the statue of Methapus. This Methapus reformed some of the rites. He
was an Athenian by race, an organizer of all sorts of mystic rites. He
it was who established also among the Thebans the rites of the Cabiri.
And he erected near the enclosure of the Lycomidæ a statue with an
inscription which confirms my account. “I have purified the home and
paths of Hermes and the firstborn daughter of Demeter, where they say
Messene established games to the Great Goddesses, owing to the son
of Caucon, the illustrious descendant of Phlyus. But I wonder that
Lycus the son of Pandion should establish the sacred rites of Atthis
in venerable Andania.” This inscription shews that Caucon who came to
Messene was the descendant of Phlyus, and confirms all the other facts
about Lycus, and that the mysteries in ancient times were celebrated
at Andania. And it seems also common sense that Messene would not
establish the mysteries in any other place than where she and Polycaon
lived.




CHAPTER II.


And being very anxious to know accurately who the sons of Polycaon
were by Messene, I perused the poem called _the Great Eœæ_ and the
Naupactian poems, and also all the genealogical information of Cinæthon
and Asius. And yet I did not discover anything in them except that
_the Great Eœæ_ say that Polycaon the son of Butes married Euæchme,
the daughter of Hyllus the son of Hercules, but they make no mention
of either Messene or her husband. But in after time, when none of the
descendants of Polycaon survived, they continued five generations and
no more, they introduced as King Perieres the son of Æolus. To his
court came as the Messenians say Melaneus, a skilful archer and for
that reason thought to be the son of Apollo, and Perieres assigned
to him Carnasium to dwell in, which was formerly called Œchalia from
the wife of Melaneus. But the Thessalians and Eubœans--for there are
almost always disputed accounts of most Grecian events--give different
accounts. The former say that Eurytium a place deserted in our days
was a city in old times and called Œchalia: but Creophylus in his
Heraclea has written what corresponds with the account of the Eubœans.
And Hecatæus the Milesian writes that Œchalia is in Scium a part of
Eretria. But the Messenians seem to me to give the most probable
account, especially about the bones of Eurytus, which I shall touch
upon later. And Perieres had by Gorgophone the daughter of Perseus
Aphareus and Leucippus who, on his death, succeeded their father as
kings of the Messenians, but Aphareus had most power. During his reign
he built the city Arene which got its name from the daughter of Œbalus,
his wife and uterine sister. For Gorgophone was married to Œbalus, as
I have already mentioned, in my account of Argolis, and also in my
account of Laconia. Aphareus then built the city Arene in Messenia, and
received into his house his cousin Neleus, the son of Cretheus, the
son of Æolus (who was surnamed Poseidon), when he fled from Pelias at
Iolcus, and gave him the maritime parts of the land, among which were
several other cities besides Pylos, where Neleus dwelt, and made it his
seat of government. And Lycus the son of Pandion came also to Arene,
when he also fled from Athens from his brother Ægeus. And he taught the
mysteries of the Great Goddesses to Aphareus and his sons and his wife
Arene. And he introduced them into Andania, for Caucon there initiated
Messene. And the elder and more manly of Aphareus’ children was Idas,
and the younger was Lynceus, of whom Pindar said, believe it who will,
that he had such keen eyesight that he could see through the trunk of
a tree. We do not know of Lynceus having had a son, but Ides had by
Marpessa a daughter Cleopatra, who married Meleager. And the writer
of the Cyprian Poems says that the wife of Protesilaus, (who when the
Greeks got to the Troad was the first who ventured to land), was by
name Polydora, and he also says that she was the daughter of Meleager
the son of Œneus. If this be correct then all these three women,
beginning with Marpessa, committed suicide after the death of their
husbands.




CHAPTER III.


But when between the sons of Aphareus and Castor and Pollux (their
uncles) a quarrel arose about cattle, and Lynceus was slain by Pollux,
while Idas died smitten with lightning, the house of Aphareus was
entirely deprived of male offspring, and upon Nestor the son of Neleus
devolved the kingdom of the Messenians, over all whom Idas reigned over
and others besides, except those who followed the sons of Æsculapius.
For they say that the sons of Æsculapius that went on the expedition
to Ilium were Messenians: for Æsculapius was the son of Arsinoe the
daughter of Leucippus, and not the son of Coronis. And they call a
deserted place in Messenia Tricca, it is mentioned by Homer in the
passage where Nestor is consoling Machaon, who was wounded with an
arrow. He would not have exhibited such kindness except to a neighbour
and king of the same tribe. They confirm also greatly this account
about the children of Æsculapius by showing at Gerenia the monument of
Machaon, and at Pharæ the temple of the sons of Machaon.

  And after the end of the war against Ilium, and the death of Nestor
after his return home, the expedition of the Dorians and return of
the Heraclidæ two generations afterwards drove out the descendants of
Neleus from Messenia. And this was as it were the climax of the doings
of Temenus which I have already described. But I will narrate this much
more. When the Dorians assigned Argos to Temenus, Cresphontes asked
of them Messenia, on the ground that he was older than Aristodemus,
who had just died. But Theras the son of Autesion vehemently opposed
Cresphontes; he was of Theban ancestry and fifth descendant of
Polynices the son of Œdipus, and at this time Guardian of Aristodemus’
sons, as he was their uncle on the mother’s side, for Aristodemus
had married the daughter of Autesion, whose name was Argia. But
Cresphontes, for he was determined to have Messenia, begged of Temenus
to decide the question by lots. And Temenus put into a water-pot which
had water in it the lots of Cresphontes and the sons of Aristodemus
separately, so that he whose lot came up first should have Messenia.
Temenus prepared both the lots, the lot of the sons of Aristodemus
he made of clay dried in the sun, and Cresphontes’ lot of clay that
had been baked in the furnace: and the lot of the sons of Aristodemus
melted, and stuck to the bottom of the water-pot, so that Cresphontes
(for his lot came out) got possession in this way of Messenia. And
the old Messenians were not turned out by the Dorians, but agreed to
Cresphontes being their king, and to the partition of the land among
the Dorians. And they were brought over to this compliance by suspicion
of their former kings, because they were Minyæ who had originally
sprung from Iolcus. And the wife of Cresphontes was Merope the daughter
of Cypselus (who was at that time king of the Arcadians), by whom
he had several children and the name of the youngest was Æpytus. And
his palace, where he himself and his sons meant to live, he built at
Stenyclerus: for in ancient times Perieres and the other kings lived
at Andania, and after Aphareus had built Arene he and his sons lived
there, and in the reign of Nestor and his descendants the Court lived
at Pylos, but Cresphontes changed the royal residence to Stenyclerus.
And, as he chiefly ingratiated himself with the people, the wealthy
classes rose up in insurrection against him and killed him and all his
sons except Æpytus, who being quite a boy was brought up by Cypselus,
and alone survived of all the house, and when he grew to man’s estate
the Arcadians restored him to Messene. And the other kings of the
Dorians, the sons of Aristodemus, and Isthmius the son of Temenus,
joined in bringing him back. And when Æpytus became king he punished
his father’s murderers, and all those who had instigated the crime:
and bringing over to his side by his attentions those who were in high
position among the Messenians, and the populace by gifts, he arrived at
such a pitch of honour that his descendants were called Æpytidæ instead
of Heraclidæ.

  And Glaucus the son of Æpytus, who succeeded his father, in all
other respects imitated his father both in public and private, but far
exceeded him in piety. For when the sacred enclosure of Zeus on the
summit of Ithome did not receive honours among the Dorians, through the
neglect of Polycaon and Messene, Glaucus restored his worship: and was
the first to sacrifice to Machaon the son of Æsculapius at Gerenia, and
awarded such gifts to Messene the daughter of Triopas as are usually
bestowed on heroes. And Isthmius Glaucus’ son also built a temple to
Gorgasus and Nicomachus at Pharæ. And the son of Isthmius was Dotadas,
who, though Messenia had several other havens, constructed one at
Mothone. And Sybotas the son of Dotadas decreed that annually the king
should sacrifice by the river Pamisus, and offer victims to Eurytus the
son of Melaneus in Œchalia, before the rites of the Great Goddesses
that are still celebrated in Andania.




CHAPTER IV.


And in the reign of Phintas, the son of Sybotas, the Messenians first
sent to Apollo at Delos sacrifices and a choir of men. And their
processional Hymn to the god was composed by Eumelus, and these are
considered the only genuine lines of Eumelus. It was during the reign
of this Phintas that a disagreement for the first time came about
between the Lacedæmonians and the Messenians. The cause is doubtful,
but is traditionally as follows. On the borders of Messenia is a
temple of Artemis Limnas, in which the Messenians and Lacedæmonians
were the only Dorians that had a share. The Lacedæmonians say that
some maidens of theirs who were present at the feast were violated by
some Messenians, and that their king Teleclus, (the son of Archelaus,
the son of Agesilaus, the son of Doryssus, the son of Labotas, the
son of Echestratus, the son of Agis,) was slain in endeavouring to
prevent this outrage. They also say that the maidens who were violated
put themselves to death from shame. But the Messenian account is that
Teleclus plotted against their persons of quality that came to the
temple, on account of the excellence of the Messenian soil, and picked
out some beardless Spartans, and, dressing them in female attire and
ornaments like maidens, introduced them armed with daggers among some
of the Messenians who were resting: but the other Messenians came
up to the rescue, and killed the beardless young men and Teleclus
himself. And the Lacedæmonians--for their king had not contrived all
this without the common consent--knowing that they had begun the wrong,
did not demand vengeance for the murder of Teleclus. These are the
different accounts the two nations give, let everyone accept the view
he prefers.

  And a generation afterwards, when Alcamenes the son of Teleclus was
king at Lacedæmon, and the king of the other family was Theopompus, the
son of Nicander, the son of Charillus, the son of Polydectes, the son
of Eunomus, the son of Prytanis, the son of Eurypon, and Antiochus and
Androcles the sons of Phintas were kings of the Messenians, strife
arose between the Lacedæmonians and Messenians, and the Lacedæmonians
began hostilities, availing themselves, as they were full of animosity
and very warlike, of an adequate and even specious pretext. But had
their disposition been more peaceable it would have been settled by
arbitration. This is what happened. Polychares a Messenian in other
respects not obscure was a victor at Olympia in the games, when the
people of Elis were celebrating their 4th Olympiad and competed only
in the race in which Polychares was victor. This man had much cattle
and, because he had not sufficient land to pasture them upon, he handed
them over to Euæphnus a Spartan to feed on his land, on condition that
he should have a share in the produce of the cattle. Now Euæphnus was
a person who preferred unrighteous gains to acting with integrity,
and was generally speaking a wheedling fellow, so he sold the oxen
of Polychares to merchants who sailed to Laconia, and went himself
to Polychares and reported to him that some pirates had landed on
the spot, and violently robbed him both of cattle and herdsmen. And
while he was deceiving Polychares one of the herdsmen fled from the
merchants, and coming back to Polychares found Euæphnus with him, and
accused him to his master. And being detected and having no defence,
he earnestly begged for pardon from Polychares and his son: on the
score that, among the elements in human nature whereby we become
unjust almost by compulsion, the love of gain is the most powerful.
And he stated the sum which he had received for the cattle, and asked
Polychares’ son to go with him and carry it back to his father. And
when they went on their journey and got to Laconia, Euæphnus dared a
deed more unholy than the former, he slew the son of Polychares. And
when Polychares knew of this last misfortune, he went to Lacedæmon to
the kings and Ephors, and went wailing through the multitude, reckoning
up what he had suffered at the hands of Euæphnus, whom he had treated
as a friend, and trusted more than all the Lacedæmonians. And when he
got no redress, though he went continually to the authorities, then he
went off his head, and giving way to his anger, and being perfectly
reckless of the consequences, endeavoured to kill every Lacedæmonian he
met.




CHAPTER V.


The Lacedæmonian account is that they went to war because Polychares
was not given up to them, and because of the murder of Teleclus, and
because they were suspected earlier still of having had a hand in the
villany of Cresphontes about the lots. But the Messenians contradict
what I have already said about Teleclus, and point to the fact that
Æpytus the son of Cresphontes was restored by the sons of Aristodemus,
which they would never have done had they been at variance with
Cresphontes. And they say that they did not give up Polychares to
the Lacedæmonians for punishment, because neither would they give up
Euæphnus, but they were willing that sentence should be given by the
Argives (who were the kinsmen of both) at Amphictyonia, or that the
case should be submitted to the Court at Athens called the Areopagus,
because that court seemed from ancient times appointed for murder
cases. They also say that the Lacedæmonians did not go to war on this
account, but in consequence of their ambition plotted against their
land and did various things, alleging at one time the condition of
Arcadia, at another the state of Argos, for they were never satisfied
with slicing off from time to time the territory of both of those
people. And they were the first to become friends of the barbarian
Crœsus who sent them gifts, at the time when he reduced to slavery
all the Greeks in Asia Minor, and all the Dorians that dwelt in the
mainland of Caria. And they declare that, when the Phocian leaders
plundered the temple at Delphi, the kings at Sparta and other noblemen
privately, and the Ephors and senators publicly, had a hand in it.
And above all, to shew that the Lacedæmonians would stick at nothing
for lucre, they twitted them with their alliance with Apollodorus the
tyrant of Cassandrea. Why indeed the Messenians consider this such a
bitter taunt, I cannot now discuss: for except that the courage of
the Messenians and the length of time they fought differed from the
tyranny of Apollodorus, they suffered nearly as much as the people of
Cassandrea. These are the causes which each nation assign for the war.

  And now an embassy of Lacedæmonians came to demand the extradition of
Polychares. The kings of the Messenians however answered the embassy
that after deliberation with the people they would send an answer
to Sparta, and accordingly after the departure of the embassy they
convened the citizens to a general assembly. And different opinions
were bandied about; Androcles thought they ought to give up Polychares
as having acted impiously and most savagely, Antiochus took the
opposite view, and maintained that it would be most distressing if
Polychares should suffer before the eyes of Euæphnus, and enumerated
the harrowing details of what his punishment would be. And eventually
the rival parties of Androcles and Antiochus proceeded to such lengths
that they took up arms. However their strife was not long continued,
for the party of Antiochus, being far superior in numbers, slew
Androcles and the most illustrious of his partizans. And Antiochus
being now the only king sent letters to Sparta, to say that he would
submit the matter to the arbitration of the courts I have mentioned.
But the Lacedæmonians are said to have given no answer to the bearers
of these letters. And not many months afterwards Antiochus died, and
Euphaes his son succeeded him. And the Lacedæmonians not only sent
no herald to proclaim war with the Messenians, nor openly renounced
friendship with them, but made their preparations as secretly as
possible, and previously bound themselves by oath that neither for
length of war (if it should not be decided speedily), nor for reverses
(if they should meet with even great ones), would they leave off till
they had won Messenia by the fortune of war. After taking this oath
they made a night-attack on Amphea, having appointed Alcamenes the son
of Teleclus as their General. Amphea is a small town in Messenia but
near Laconia, situated on a high hill, and well supplied with water.
And in other respects Amphea seemed a very convenient base for their
war. So they captured the town, the gates being open and no garrison
there, and killed all the Messenians that they took in the town, some
even in their beds, and others as they found them sitting as suppliants
at the temples and altars of the gods, and only a few escaped. This was
the first attack the Lacedæmonians made upon Messenia, in the second
year of the ninth Olympiad, in which Xenodocus the Messenian was victor
in the race. And at Athens there were not as yet yearly magistrates
appointed by lot: for the descendants of Melanthus, who were called
Medontidæ, had at first much of their power taken away by the people,
and instead of a kingdom their power became limited, and afterwards
their authority was definitely restricted to ten years. At the time of
the capture of Amphea Æsimides, the son of Æschylus, was in the fifth
year of his government over the Athenians.




CHAPTER VI.


But before I write the history of this war, and the actions and
sufferings entailed by it upon both parties by Providence, I wish
to relate in their order the exploits of Aristomenes the Messenian
hero. For this war between the Lacedæmonians and their allies and
the Messenians and their mercenaries did not get its name from the
attacking force, as the Persian and Peloponnesian wars, but was called
the Messenian war from the disasters which befell the Messenians, just
as the war at Ilium got called Trojan and not Grecian, so it was in
this war, which Rhianus of Bene and Myron of Priene have celebrated,
the former in poetry, the latter in prose. Neither of them however
have narrated fully the events of the war from beginning to end, but
Myron has described the capture of Amphea and its consequences up
to the death of Aristodemus, and Rhianus has not touched at all the
commencement of the war, but only what eventually happened to the
Messenians in consequence of their quarrel with the Lacedæmonians,
and he has not described even the whole of this, but only what took
place after the battle which they fought at what was called _the great
trench_; and the hero Aristomenes on whose account only I mentioned
Rhianus and Myron, and who was the first and foremost in bringing
the name of Messene to honour, this hero (I say) has been introduced
by Myron into his history, and by Rhianus into his poem, in which
Aristomenes is as much lauded as Achilles by Homer in the Iliad. As
these two have given such different accounts, I am obliged to accept
one of them and not both together. Rhianus appears to me to speak more
probably about the age of Aristomenes. But Myron, as one can learn
in other particulars and not least in the history of this Messenian
war, does not with sufficient accuracy test the truth or at least
probability of what he relates. For he states that Aristomenes slew
Theopompus, the king of the Lacedæmonians, a little before the death
of Aristodemus, whereas we know that Theopompus did not die in battle
or in any other way before the end of the war. And in fact Theopompus
concluded the war, as the elegiac lines of Tyrtæus bear me out,

    ‘To our king Theopompus god-beloved,
      Through whom we took Messene spacious town.’

Aristomenes therefore in my opinion was in the second Messenian war,
and I shall relate in detail all about him when I come to that part of
my subject.

  Now the Messenians, when they heard all that had happened at Amphea
from those who escaped from its capture, convened delegates from all
their towns at Stenyclerus. And when the people were gathered together
in the assembly, several of those in authority, and last of all the
king, exhorted them not to be dejected at the fall of Amphea as if all
the war were decided thereby, and not to fear the preparations of the
Lacedæmonians as more formidable than their own, for although they had
had longer experience in war, yet the Messenians would find necessity
a great spur to brave men, and would meet with greater favour from the
gods as defending their country, and not commencing hostilities.




CHAPTER VII.


With these words Euphaes dismissed the assembly, and from that time
forward kept all the Messenians under arms, compelling those that did
not know to learn the art of war, and making those that did practise
more frequently than before. And the Lacedæmonians made incursions into
Messenia, but did not injure the country inasmuch as they considered
it their own, neither did they cut down trees nor pull down houses;
but they drove off whatever cattle they found, and carried off the
corn and all fruit. They likewise made attacks on some of the towns
but took none, inasmuch as they were strongly fortified and carefully
guarded, and after much loss they desisted from the attempt, and ceased
attacking them. And the Messenians plundered the maritime parts of
Laconia, and all the farms in the neighbourhood of Mount Taygetus. And
in the 4th year after the capture of Amphea Euphaes, full of zeal from
the ardour of the Messenians who were boiling over with rage at the
Lacedæmonians, and at the same time thinking their training complete,
ordered a march, and bade the slaves follow with wood and all other
things necessary for entrenching a camp. And the Lacedæmonians heard
from the garrison at Amphea that the Messenians were on the march,
and they too marched out to battle. And at a place in Messenia very
convenient for a battle, with a deep ravine in front of it, Euphaes
drew up the Messenians in battle array, having appointed Cleonnis to
the chief command: the cavalry and light-armed troops, which were
both less than 500, were under Pytharatus and Antander. And when the
two armies engaged the ravine prevented the heavy-armed troops from
encountering, though they advanced against one another eagerly and
impetuously in their mutual hatred, but the cavalry and the light-armed
troops engaged above the ravine, and they were equally matched in
numbers and skill, and consequently the battle was evenly poised. But
while these were engaged, Euphaes ordered the slaves first to fortify
the rear of the army and then the flanks with stockades. And when night
overtook them and the battle was stayed, then they fortified also the
front of the camp opposite the ravine, so that next day the tactical
skill and foresight of Euphaes dawned upon the Lacedæmonians, and they
found that they could not fight against the Messenians if they would
not come out of their entrenchments, and they despaired of besieging
them as they had no siege train.

  And so they returned home: and a year afterwards, when the old man
reviled them and taunted them with cowardice and disregard of their
oath, they openly made preparations for a second campaign against
the Messenians. And they were led by both their kings, Theopompus the
son of Nicander, and Polydorus the son of Alcamenes, for Alcamenes
was now dead. And the Messenians made counter-preparations, and
when the Spartans marched to battle moved out to meet them. And the
Lacedæmonians were led by Polydorus on the left wing, and Theopompus on
the right, and in the centre by Euryleon, a Lacedæmonian for the nonce
but originally a Theban descended from Cadmus, the fifth descendant
from Ægeus, the son of Œolycus, the son of Theras, the son of Autesion.
And opposite the right wing of the Lacedæmonians were the Messenians
under Antander and Euphaes, and on the wing opposite Polydorus under
Pytharatus, and in the centre under Cleonnis. And as they were just
going to engage, the kings came up and exhorted their men. To the
Lacedæmonians Theopompus made a short harangue according to the custom
of his country, reminding them of their oath against the Messenians,
and how noble an ambition it was to shew themselves more capable of
brilliant exploits than their fathers who subjugated their neighbours,
and to acquire a richer territory. Euphaes spoke at greater length than
the Lacedæmonian king, but not more so than the occasion warranted.
For he shewed that the contest was not only for land or possessions,
but they knew clearly he said what misery would come upon them if
they were conquered: their wives and children would be led off into
captivity, the lightest punishment for their young men would be death,
perhaps not unaccompanied by outrage, their temples would be plundered,
their country destroyed by fire. He was not he said merely making
suppositions, what those who were taken at Amphea had suffered was
proof positive of all that he said. Rather than bear such ills it would
be preferable to die nobly, and it would be much easier (when they were
yet unconquered and as bold as the enemy) to vanquish their adversaries
by their courage, than to retrieve their ruined fortunes if they were
faint-hearted now. Such was the speech of Euphaes.




CHAPTER VIII.


And directly the leaders on either side gave the signal for battle,
the Messenians came on at the double, and exposed themselves freely
as men dealing death in their rage at every blow, and everyone was
anxious to begin the fight. And the Lacedæmonians rushed out to meet
them with equal ardour, but took care not to break their line. And when
they got to close quarters, they threatened one another, rattling their
arms, and looking fiercely at one another, and proceeded to abuse, the
Lacedæmonians saying that the Messenians were already their slaves, and
that they were not a whit freer than the Helots, and the Messenians
replying that they were impious in what they were attempting, _viz._
in attacking kinsmen for the sake of gain, and were profane to the
national gods of the Dorians and especially to Hercules. And by this
time they followed up words with blows, and rushed on one another pell
mell (with greatest vigour the Lacedæmonians), man attacking man. From
their long experience and practice in war the Lacedæmonians had the
advantage, and also from their numbers, (for the neighbouring nations
who were subject to them they had with them in their army, and the
Asinæi and Dryopes, who a generation earlier had been driven by the
Argives from their own land and had come to Lacedæmon as suppliants,
were now compelled to swell their army), and against the light-armed
troops of the Messenians they had Cretan archers, mercenaries. And the
Messenians were animated equally by despair and contempt of death, and
all their sufferings they looked on as necessary rather than dreadful
to those who loved their country’s honour, and the more vigorously they
fought the harder they thought would things go for the Lacedæmonians.
And some of them advancing in front of their lines exhibited brilliant
bravery, and others badly wounded and scarce alive were animated by
desperation. And they cheered one another on, those who were alive
and yet unwounded encouraging the wounded to receive with joy their
fate, and sell their lives as dearly as possible: and the wounded,
(when they perceived their strength failing, and that they would
soon yield up their breath), urging on the unwounded to shew as much
courage as themselves had shewn, and not to let their death be useless
to their country. But the Lacedæmonians at first made no harangues to
their men, and were not as ready as the Messenians to display heroic
courage: but being accustomed to war from boys their formation in line
was deeper, and they expected that the Messenians could not hold out
as long as they could, nor stand the strain of their heavy armour,
nor their wounds. Such were the peculiar features of each army in
respect to both the behaviour and feelings of the combatants: what
was common to both was that no quarter was asked for, perhaps this
was despaired of from their fierce hatred, and they felt the greatest
self-indignation that they had not sold their lives dearer: and those
that killed their man abstained both from boasting and reproaches,
being uncertain which party would win. And most unexpectedly fell
those who were endeavouring to plunder some of the dead bodies, for
either by disclosing some naked part of their body they got pierced
with darts, not on their guard in their thirst for plunder, or they
were killed by some of those whom they were attempting to rob who were
still alive. The kings also fought right valiantly, and Theopompus
rushed with ungovernable rage against Euphaes, intending to kill him.
And Euphaes seeing him rushing on said to Antander that Theopompus was
displaying as much bravery as his ancestor Polynices: for Polynices
led an army from Argos against his own country, and he and his brother
mutually slew one another: and Theopompus (he added) wished to load
the family of the Heraclidæ with the same guilt as that of the family
of Laius and Œdipus: he would not however go with joy from the battle.
With these words he himself went forward to meet Theopompus. Hereupon
the battle, which had rather flagged, took up fresh vigour again, and
their bodies were renewed as it were, and the fearlessness of death on
both sides was increased, so that one might have thought the battle had
only just commenced. And eventually Euphaes’ division, nearly mad with
desperate valour and stoutheartedness, for the King’s bodyguard were
all picked men, broke the enemy’s line, routed Theopompus, and put the
Lacedæmonians in that part of the field to flight. But the other wing
of the Messenians was hard pressed, for Pytharatus their General was
dead, and without a leader they became disordered and dejected. But
neither did Polydorus pursue the fleeing Messenians, nor Euphaes the
fleeing Lacedæmonians. For Euphaes and his staff thought it better to
come to the aid of their vanquished friends: nor did they engage with
Polydorus and his troops: for by this time it was already dark, and the
Lacedæmonians were prevented from following the fugitives not least by
their ignorance of the country. It was also their country’s custom not
to pursue an enemy too hotly, being more anxious not to break their
line than to annihilate the enemy. And in the centre on both sides, the
Lacedæmonians under Euryleon, and the Messenians under Cleonnis, the
fight was pretty equal, till the approach of night put an end to the
contest.

  This battle was fought on both sides mainly by the heavy armed
infantry. Some cavalry there was indeed, but they had no great
influence on the fortunes of the day, for the Peloponnesians of
that day were not good horsemen. And the light armed troops of the
Messenians and the Cretans on the Lacedæmonian side did not come to
the encounter at all: for they were posted in ancient fashion among
the infantry. And on the following day neither party were minded to
renew the battle nor to erect a trophy of victory, but as the day wore
on they sent out heralds to treat of the burying of their dead, and
as this was agreed to on both sides, they began to bury their dead
immediately.




CHAPTER IX.


But the Messenians after the battle began to find their affairs in a
deplorable condition: for they were nearly ruined by their outlay in
money expended in keeping garrisons in the towns, and their slaves
deserted to the Lacedæmonians. Also a pestilence fell upon them, which
troubled them greatly being like the plague, though it did not prevail
universally throughout their country. And after deliberation about
their present condition they determined to abandon their towns in the
interior of the country, and dwell in the mountain district of Ithome.
And there was a small town at Ithome which Homer has mentioned in his
catalogue,

    ‘And rocky Ithome.’[56]

To this town they repaired, extending its ancient limits so as to
make it a sufficient defence for all of them. And the place was in
other respects a strong position: for Ithome is as high as any of the
mountains within the Isthmus, and in this respect most difficult of
access. They thought they would also send an envoy to Delphi, and they
selected for this mission Tisis the son of Alcis, who in general merit
and in divination was considered inferior to nobody. This Tisis on his
return from Delphi was laid in wait for by the Lacedæmonians who were
in garrison at Amphea: but he would not be taken alive, so valiantly
did he defend himself against those that had lain in ambush, in spite
of the wounds he received from them, till a voice was heard without
any appearance of the speaker, “Let the bearer of the oracle go.” And
Tisis, directly he got safe to Ithome, and had delivered his oracle
to the king, fell down dead of his wounds. And Euphaes collected the
Messenians together and recited the oracle. “Sacrifice a pure virgin
(selected by lot out of the family of the Æpytidæ) by night to the gods
below. But if you cannot find one of the Æpytidæ, then sacrifice anyone
else who offers himself as a willing victim.” This being the utterance
of the god, forthwith all the maidens of the family of the Æpytidæ drew
lots. And when the lot fell upon the daughter of Lyciscus, Epebolus
the seer said it would not do to sacrifice her; for she was not really
the daughter of Lyciscus, but a girl that the wife of Lyciscus being
barren had palmed off as hers. While he was making this revelation,
Lyciscus took off the girl and fled to Sparta. And the Messenians being
very dejected at finding out the flight of Lyciscus, Aristodemus, a
man of the family of the Æpytidæ, and in other respects and in war
more illustrious than Lyciscus, offered to sacrifice his own daughter.
But the affairs of mankind, and not least their desires, are secretly
directed by Fate, just as the bottom of a river has pebbles, so that
Aristodemus on this occasion, endeavouring to save Messene, was
prevented by the following circumstance. A Messenian, whose name is not
known, happened to be deeply in love with the daughter of Aristodemus,
and was on the eve of marrying her. He at first disputed the right of
Aristodemus to the maiden as he had betrothed her to him, and argued
that he being her betrothed alone had right to her. And afterwards,
when he found this argument unavailing, he invented a shameful story,
that he had had an amour with her and that she was pregnant by him.
And at last he wrought up Aristodemus to such a pitch, that driven
to madness in his anger he killed his daughter, and afterwards cut
her up and found she was not pregnant. And Epebolus who was present
bade somebody else give his daughter as a victim, for the daughter of
Aristodemus (he said) could be no more use to them now she was dead:
for her father had indeed killed her, but not sacrificed her to the
gods as the Pythian oracle ordered. When the seer had said this the
mass of the Messenians rushed forward to kill the girl’s lover, as he
had caused Aristodemus to commit a useless crime, and had rendered
doubtful the safety of the community. But this man was a very great
friend of Euphaes. Euphaes accordingly persuaded the Messenians that
the oracle was fulfilled by the death of the girl, and that what
Aristodemus had done was sufficient. And when he had said this all the
Æpytidæ agreed with him: for each was anxious to have his fears removed
about having to sacrifice his own daughter. So they hearkened to the
advice of the king and broke up the assembly, and afterwards turned
their attention to the sacrifices and festival of the gods.




CHAPTER X.


But the Lacedæmonians on hearing the oracle of the Messenians were
very dejected, both they and their kings, and henceforth shrank from
resuming the war. But in the sixth year after the flight of Lyciscus
from Ithome the Lacedæmonians (as their sacrifices were auspicious)
led an army to Ithome. But the Cretans chanced to be absent, and the
allies of the Messenians were also behindhand. For the Spartans were
an object of suspicion to other Peloponnesians and especially to the
Arcadians and Argives. The Argives indeed were going to come to help
the Messenians secretly without the knowledge of the Lacedæmonians,
privately rather than from public decree. But the Arcadian expedition
was publicly announced, though they were behindhand too. But the
Messenians were induced by confidence in the oracle to hazard war even
without allies. In most respects the battle was no different from the
former one, for daylight on this occasion too failed the combatants:
it is not however mentioned that either wing or division were broken,
for they say the troops did not remain in the order in which they were
placed at first, but the bravest men came from the wings in both armies
into the centre, and there was the strain of battle. For Euphaes was
more ardent in fight than one would have expected from a king, and
recklessly rushing upon Theopompus and his staff, received many mortal
wounds. As he fainted away and fell to the ground, and could scarce
breathe, the Lacedæmonians strove with might and main to drag him to
their army. But their previous goodwill to Euphaes, and their future
disgrace if they abandoned him, roused the Messenians, and it appeared
better to them to give up their lives for their king rather than
purchase safety by abandoning him. Accordingly the peril of Euphaes
prolonged the battle, and added to the bravery exhibited on both
sides, and afterwards he revived, and saw that his men were fighting
as valiantly as the foe, and not many days afterwards he died, having
been king of the Messenians for 13 years, and having been at war with
the Lacedæmonians during all his reign. And as he had no children he
left the choice of his successor to the people, and Cleonnis and Damis
were rival competitors with Aristodemus, being considered superior to
him both in other respects and in war. And Antander had been killed in
the battle jeoparding his life for Euphaes. And the opinions of the
seers, Epebolus and Ophioneus, were both similar, that the kingdom of
Æpytus and his descendants should not be conferred upon a man polluted
with the murder of a daughter. Nevertheless Aristodemus was elected
and became king. And Ophioneus the Messenian seer was blind from his
birth, and had the following mode of divination. By enquiring into a
person’s private and public fortune in the past he informed them what
it would be in the future. This was his divination, and Aristodemus
having become king through the people was desirous to gratify them in
all that was reasonable, and of those in authority he held Cleonnis and
Damis in special honour. He also paid great attention to the allies,
and sent gifts to the most influential Arcadians both at Argos and
Sicyon. And in the war which was carried on in the reign of Aristodemus
they pillaged from time to time, and in the summertime made incursions
into one another’s country. There were counter-incursions into Laconia
on the part of the Arcadians with the Messenians. But the Argives
did not think it well openly to proclaim their hostility against the
Lacedæmonians, but made their preparations so as to strike in when the
fray begun.




CHAPTER XI.


In the fifth year of the reign of Aristodemus, when both nations
were about to take the field again after open proclamation of war,
both very much weakened by the length and expenses of the war, then
allies came to both, to the Lacedæmonians the Corinthians alone of
all the Peloponnesians, and to the Messenians the Arcadians in full
force, and picked men from Argos and Sicyon. The Lacedæmonians placed
the Corinthians and Helots and the provincials in the centre, and
themselves with their kings took up their position on the wings, in
deeper and fuller formation than was ever before adopted. And the
dispositions of Aristodemus and his staff for the battle were as
follows. For all the Arcadians or Messenians that were strong in body
and stout of heart, but had not good weapons, he picked out the best
arms, and when the action became hot, posted them among the Argives
and Sicyonians: and extended his line so as not to be taken in flank
by the enemy. And he took care that his men were so placed that they
had the mountain Ithome in their rear. And he appointed Cleonnis to
the command here, and himself and Damis stayed with the light-armed
troops, and a few slingers and archers: most in this part of the army
were well adapted physically for attack and retreat, and lightly armed.
Each had a breastplate or shield, but such as were deficient in this
respect had goatskins and sheepskins, or the skins of wild beasts, the
Arcadian mountaineers in particular had the skins of wolves and bears.
And each had several javelins, and some had lances. And these lay in
ambush in Ithome where they could be best concealed from sight. And the
heavy armed troops of the Messenians and the allies stood the first
onset of the Lacedæmonians, and afterwards were in all respects full of
bravery. They were outnumbered by the enemy, but being picked men they
fought against an armed mob and not against men of equal discipline
to themselves, consequently they held out much longer through their
bravery and skill. Moreover the light-armed troops of the Messenians,
when the signal was given, rushed against the Lacedæmonians and hemmed
them in, and hurled their javelins at their flanks, and the bolder of
them rushed in and fought hand to hand. And the Lacedæmonians, though
they saw before them a second danger and so hopeless a one in the same
place, yet were not in despair, but turned upon the light-armed troops
and tried to repel them, but as because of the lightness of their
armour they easily ran away, the Lacedæmonians were both perplexed
and irritated. Somehow or other men are apt to be especially vexed
at what happens contrary to their expectation. And so here those of
the Spartans who were already wounded, and those who were nearest to
the light-armed troops, as their comrades lay dead, rushed out of
their ranks wherever they saw the light-armed troops pressing on,
and in their heat pursued rather too far as the enemy retired. Then
the light-armed troops of the Messenians, as they had done at first,
struck them, and hurled their javelins at them as they stood their
ground, and when they pursued made a feint to flee, and attacked them
as they tried to rejoin their men. And this they did in various parts
of the field, and at different points in the enemy’s lines. And the
heavy-armed of the Messenians and the allies at this juncture pressed
more boldly right at the foe. And eventually the Lacedæmonians, spent
with the length of the battle and their wounds, and at the same time
harassed beyond measure by the light-armed troops, broke their ranks.
And in the rout the light-armed troops harassed them all the more.
Of the Lacedæmonians who were cut to pieces in the battle, I could
not ascertain the number, but I believe it was very large. And the
return home to some was easy, but to the Corinthians it was sure to be
dangerous, for, whether they returned through Argolis or by Sicyon,
they had equally to pass through hostile country.




CHAPTER XII.


The Lacedæmonians were troubled at this reverse that had befallen them,
and at the many excellent warriors they had lost in the battle. And
they despaired of success in the war, so they sent envoys to Delphi.
And this was the oracle the Pythian Priestess gave. ‘Phœbus bids you
not only apply yourselves to warlike deeds, but as it was by cunning
that the people got the Messenian land, by the selfsame cunning as it
was got shall it be taken.’ The kings and Ephors, though they were very
anxious to do so, could not find out a good plan till they imitated
the wiliness of Odysseus at Ilium. They sent 100 men to Ithome to
spy out the enemies’ designs, who were to pretend to be deserters.
And to keep up the cheat these men were publicly condemned at Sparta
as deserters. But on their arrival Aristodemus sent them home again
at once, saying, “The injuries done to the Lacedæmonians are recent,
their craft ancient.” The Lacedæmonians having failed in this manœuvre
next attempted to tamper with the allies of the Messenians. But as the
Arcadians rejected their overtures, for to them the envoys went first,
they did not proceed to Argos. And Aristodemus hearing of all these
intrigues on the part of the Lacedæmonians sent himself messengers to
consult the oracle at Delphi. And this was the answer of the Pythian
priestess. “The glory in the war the god gives you, but take care that
the treacherous hostile ambush be not too much for you through Spartan
wiles; for if Ares is to have their well-wrought armour, and the
garlands of their dances are to belong to sorrowing owners, then must
they avoid the appearance of two hidden things. Nor shall the sacred
light of day behold the end of all this till fate shall come to the
things that change their nature.” Aristodemus however and the seers
could not understand what was meant: but a few years afterwards the
god threw light on it and fulfilled it. Remarkable things too happened
at this time to the Messenians. As Lyciscus lived as a resident alien
at Sparta his daughter, whom he had taken with him in his flight from
Messene, chanced to die. And as he often went to visit his daughter’s
grave, some Arcadian cavalry lay in wait for him and carried him off.
And he was taken to Ithome, and being brought before the assembly
he made his defence; he had not left his country he said intending
treason, but in consequence of believing the assertion of the seer that
she was not his genuine daughter. In this line of defence he was not
believed to be speaking the truth till a woman, who was at that time
the priestess of Hera, came into the theatre. And she confessed that
the child was hers, and that she had given it to the wife of Lyciscus
to palm off as her own. And now (she continued) by revealing my secret
I shall depose myself from my priesthood. This she said because it
was a custom in Messene that, if any of the children of a priest or
priestess died, the priesthood should pass to somebody else. Thinking
therefore that the woman was speaking the truth, they chose for the
goddess a priestess in her place, and said that Lyciscus had acted in a
pardonable way.

  And after that they resolved, for it was the 20th year of the war,
to send again to Delphi to enquire about their chance of victory.
And to their enquiry the Pythian Priestess returned this answer. “To
those who shall first set up 100 tripods at the altar of Zeus of Ithome
the god will give the Messenian land with fame in war. This is the
will of Zeus. But guile moves you on, and behind is vengeance, and
you cannot deceive the god. Act as fate shall determine. Ruin takes
people by turns.” When they heard this they thought the oracle was
in their favour, and promised them victory in the war; for as they
were in possession of the temple of Zeus within the walls of Ithome,
they thought the Lacedæmonians could not be beforehand with them in
erecting tripods. And so they intended making wooden tripods, for
they had not means enough to make tripods of brass. But somebody from
Delphi reported the oracle at Sparta. And the Spartans had a public
consultation about it, but could hit upon no plan, but Œbalus, a man
of no great repute but evidently possessed of good judgment, made 100
tripods of clay roughly, and took them with him and nets as if he were
a hunter. And being unknown even to most of the Lacedæmonians he easily
escaped the detection of the Messenians. For joining himself with some
countrymen he went with them into Ithome, and directly night came on
he offered these clay tripods to the god, and returned to Sparta and
told the Lacedæmonians what he had done. And the Messenians when they
saw what had happened were terribly upset, and guessed (as indeed was
the case) that it was a trick of the Lacedæmonians: however Aristodemus
consoled them with arguments suited to the present conjuncture, and
placed their wooden tripods which were already made at the altar at
Ithome. It happened also that Ophioneus, the seer who was blind from
birth, greatly to the surprise of all men recovered his sight: for he
had a sharp headache and recovered his sight after it.




CHAPTER XIII.


And thenceforward--for fate already turned the scales towards the
capture of Ithome--the god gave them various predictions of their
coming destiny. For the statue of Artemis, which was of brass as well
as the armour, dropped its shield; and as Aristodemus was about to
sacrifice the victims to Zeus at Ithome, the rams of their own accord
violently dashed their heads against the altar, and were killed by
the blow. And a third phenomenon happened. Some dogs assembled in the
same place and howled all night, and eventually went off in a body to
the camp of the Lacedæmonians. This troubled Aristodemus, as also the
following vision of the night. He dreamed that he was going out to
battle fully armed, and saw lying on a table the victims’ entrails,
and his daughter appeared to him in a black dress with her breast and
belly ripped up, and he thought she threw away what was on the table,
and took away his armour, and instead of it put upon him a golden crown
and white robe. And as Aristodemus was dispirited, for he thought
the dream announced to him the end of his life, (for the Messenians
buried their notable men in white raiment with crowns on their heads),
somebody brought him word that Ophioneus had suddenly become blind
again as before. Then he understood the hidden sense of the oracle,
that by the pair who appeared after being hidden, and returned again as
fate necessitated, the Pythian Priestess meant the eyes of Ophioneus.
Thereupon Aristodemus laying to heart his domestic misfortunes, that
he had been the murderer of his daughter to no purpose, and seeing
no future hope of safety for his country, cut his throat at his
daughter’s grave, being such an one as would in all human calculation
have saved his country had not fortune brought to nothing his plans
and actions. And he died after a reign of six years and a few months.
And to the Messenians their affairs now seemed desperate, so that they
were very near sending a supplicatory embassy to the Lacedæmonians,
though pride restrained them from actually doing so, so much did they
feel the blow of Aristodemus’ death. And when they gathered together
in their assembly they did not choose another king, but appointed
Damis dictator. And he, having selected Cleonnis and Phyleus as his
coadjutors, made preparations for the campaign according to his best
ability under the circumstances: for he was pressed hard by the siege,
and not least by famine and the fear that famine inspired that they
could not hold out from want of supplies. There was no deficiency of
bravery or venturesomeness on the part of the Messenians: all their
generals and notables were killed. For about five months they held out,
and towards the close of the year evacuated Ithome, having been at war
for full twenty years, as the lines of Tyrtæus testify: “They in the
twentieth year left the rich pastures, and fled from the high hills of
Ithome.” This war came to an end in the first year of the fourteenth
Olympiad, in which Dasmon the Corinthian was victor in the stadium, the
Medontidæ at Athens being still in possession of their ten year office,
and at the completion of the fourth year of office of Hippomenes.




CHAPTER XIV.


And the Messenians who had friends at Sicyon and at Argos and amongst
the Arcadians retired to those places, and those of the family of the
priests who performed the mysteries to the Great Goddesses went to
Eleusis. And the multitude dispersed to their several nationalities.
And the Lacedæmonians first razed Ithome to the ground, and afterwards
attacked and captured the other cities. And out of the spoils they set
up to Apollo of Amyclæ some brazen tripods: under the first tripod is
a statue of Aphrodite, and under the second one of Artemis, and under
the third one of Proserpine the daughter of Demeter. These they erected
there. And of the Messenian land they gave to the Asinæi, who had been
ejected by the Argives, the territory by the sea that they still have:
and to the descendants of Androcles, (for Androcles had a daughter and
she had sons, and after the death of Androcles they fled to Sparta),
they gave what is called Hyamea. And the following conditions were
imposed on the Messenians by the Lacedæmonians. First of all they bound
them by oath not to revolt or to attempt any revolutionary movement.
And next they appointed no stated tribute, but they were to bring to
Sparta from the land half its produce. With respect too to the burials
of kings and other people in authority, provision was made that the men
and women in Messenia should wear black raiment, and a punishment was
ordained for those who violated this rule. And as to their exactions
from the Messenians they have been described by Tyrtæus: “As asses
worn out by long continued toil, carrying to their masters from
bitter necessity half of all the fruit the country yields.” And that
necessity was laid on them of mourning for their masters’ deaths he
has manifested in the following lines, “They and their wives together
wailing for their masters, when baneful death seized on any one.”

  The Messenians in these circumstances, and with no hope of any kinder
treatment from the Lacedæmonians, and thinking death in battle or a
wholesale migration from the Peloponnese preferable to their present
condition, resolved upon a general rising. And they were mainly
induced to this by the young men, who had had no experience of war,
and were ambitious, and preferred death in a free country to happiness
in all other conditions with slavery. These youths were reared in
various parts of Messenia, but the bravest and most numerous were
in the neighbourhood of Andania, and among them Aristomenes, who is
still honoured among the Messenians as a hero: and the circumstances
attending his birth they think rather remarkable. For they say that a
demon or god in the form of a dragon had an intrigue with Nicotelea his
mother. I have heard the Macedonians say similar things about Olympias,
and the Sicyonians about Aristodama. But the difference is that the
Messenians do not claim that Aristomenes was the son of Hercules or
Zeus, as the Macedonians say that Alexander was the son of Ammon, and
as the people of Sicyon say that Aratus was the son of Æsculapius, but
most of the Greeks say that Pyrrhus was the father of Aristomenes,
though I know that the Messenians call Aristomenes the son of Nicomedes
at the libations. He then, being in fall vigour of age and boldness,
and other influential persons tried to bring about a general rising.
And this was not at first done openly, but they sent secretly to Argos
and the Arcadians, to see if they would assist them as energetically as
they had done in the former war, _bonâ fide_ and not half-heartedly.




CHAPTER XV.


And when they had made all their preparations for war, and their allies
were even more zealous than they had expected, for the hostility
between the Arcadians and Argives and the Lacedæmonians had blazed out
fiercely, then in the thirty-ninth year after the capture of Ithome
they rose in insurrection, in the fourth year of the 23rd Olympiad, in
which the Hyperesian Icarus was victor in the stadium. And at Athens
there were now annual archons, and the archon this year was Tlesias.
Who were kings at Lacedæmon at this time has not been recorded by
Tyrtæus, but Rhianus in his poem has said that Leotychides was king
during this war. I cannot agree with him in this: as to Tyrtæus, though
he has not mentioned expressly the time, yet one may suppose he has
hinted it in the following passage,--in the elegiac lines he wrote
about the former war. “Nineteen years unceasingly they fought for
their country, ever with stout heart, those warriors the fathers of
our fathers.” Manifestly then it was in the third generation after the
former war that the Messenians commenced this war, and the period is
marked by the fact that the kings then at Sparta were Anaxander the son
of Eurycrates the son of Polydorus, and of the other family Anaxidamus
the son of Zeuxidamus, the son of Archidamus, the son of Theopompus. I
go as far as the fourth descendant of Theopompus, because Archidamus
the son of Theopompus died in his father’s lifetime, and the kingdom
devolved upon Zeuxidamus his grandson. And Leotychides clearly was king
after Demaratus the son of Aristo, and Aristo was seventh descendant
from Theopompus.

  And now in the first year after their insurrection the Messenians
engaged with the Lacedæmonians at a place in their country called
Deræ, and neither side had allies. And the battle was an undecided
one, but they say Aristomenes exhibited in it preterhuman bravery, so
that they elected him king after the battle, for he was of the family
of the Æpytidæ, and though he was for refusing they also appointed
him commander in chief. He was inclined to let them disown no one who
had done valiantly in war: and for himself thought it right first
and foremost (as the war with the Lacedæmonians was only just begun)
to thoroughly frighten them by some bold stroke, and so to awe them
more for the future. Accordingly he went by night to Lacedæmon and
hung up a shield at the temple of Athene Chalciœcus, and on it was
the inscription, “Aristomenes offers this to the goddess from Spartan
spoils.”

  The Lacedæmonians also had an oracular answer from Delphi, that an
Athenian would give them good advice. They sent therefore envoys to
the Athenians to report the oracle, and to ask for the man who was to
give them this good advice. And the Athenians neither wishing that
the Lacedæmonians should get the best part of the Peloponnese without
great danger, nor to disobey the god, took counsel accordingly, and
sent to Sparta one Tyrtæus a schoolmaster, who was thought to have very
little intelligence and was lame in one foot. And he on his arrival
there recited his elegiac verses and his anapæsts privately to the
authorities, and publicly to all whom he could collect together. And
a year after the battle of Deræ, when both nations had now allies,
they prepared for battle in a village called _Boar’s Memorial_. The
Messenians had the men of Elis and Arcadia as their allies in the
action, and had moreover help from Argos and Sicyon. There were also
present all the Messenians that had fled voluntarily, both those from
Eleusis who were the hereditary priests of the mysteries of the Great
Goddesses, and the descendants of Androcles: for these too hastened
to their assistance. And to the help of the Lacedæmonians came the
Corinthians, and some of the people of Lepreum from hatred to the men
of Elis. The Asinæi were neutral. _Boar’s Memorial_ is near Stenyclerus
in Messenia, and was so called because they say Hercules had a mutual
covenant there with the sons of Neleus over a boar’s entrails.




CHAPTER XVI.


And when the seers in both armies had commenced by sacrifice, the
Lacedæmonian seer being Hecas, the descendant and namesake of that
Hecas who had come to Sparta with the sons of Aristodemus, and the
Messenian seer being Theoclus, a descendant of Eumantis (a native
of Elis and one of the Iamidæ whom Cresphontes had introduced into
Messene), both armies were with more confidence stirred up to battle.
And there was ardour exhibited by several according to their age and
prowess, but notably by Anaxander, the king of the Lacedæmonians, and
the Spartans in his division: and in the Messenian army Phintas and
Androcles, the descendants of Androcles, and the men who were posted
with them, strove to show their valour. And Tyrtæus and the priests of
the Great Goddesses took no part in the action but that of cheering
on the rears of their respective armies. And this was the disposition
of Aristomenes. Eighty picked men of the Messenians about the same
age as himself were in close attendance upon him, and each of them
thought himself highly flattered to be posted near Aristomenes: and
they were very keen at detecting in a glance one another’s ideas and
especially their leader’s plans in the very germ. They and Aristomenes
had the brunt of the battle, being posted opposite to Anaxander and
the bravest of the Lacedæmonians. And receiving wounds fearlessly, and
rushing on with the greatest recklessness, in time they routed by their
boldness Anaxander’s division. As these fled Aristomenes commanded
another Messenian regiment to pursue them: and himself rushed into the
thick of the fight, and routed the men there, and then again turned to
some other part of the field. And having driven these also from their
positions he hurried on, charging those that were left, until he had
thoroughly beaten all the Lacedæmonian force, allies and all. And as
they felt some shame in fleeing, and yet could not stand these frequent
charges, he dashed in amongst them with more formidable fury than one
could have expected from one man. But near a wild pear tree that grew
in the plain Theoclus tried to prevent his passing: for he said Castor
and Pollux were seated on the pear tree. And Aristomenes giving way to
passion, and not hearing all the words of the seer, when he got to the
pear tree dropped his shield, and this loss of Aristomenes gave the
Lacedæmonians breathing time to stop from their flight: for he lost
some time trying to find his shield.

  And when the Lacedæmonians were dispirited at this blow, and were
minded to finish the war, Tyrtæus put heart into them by reciting his
verses, and got some Helots enrolled into the regiments in place of the
dead men. And when Aristomenes returned to Andania, the women welcomed
him with ribands and pelted him with flowers, and sang for him a song
not forgotten even in our days, “To the mid plain and high mountain
at Stenyclerus did Aristomenes pursue the Lacedæmonians.” And he
afterwards recovered his shield by going to Delphi, and, as the Pythian
Priestess ordered him, by descending to the sacred shrine of Trophonius
at Lebadea. And afterwards he took the shield, and hung it up as a
votive offering at Lebadea, and I have myself seen it hanging up there.
Its design is an eagle with its wings extended at the upper part of the
shield. And now Aristomenes on his return from Bœotia, having recovered
his shield at the shrine of Trophonius, immediately went in for further
action. And, having gathered together a levy of Messenians besides
his own bodyguard of picked men, he marched at nightfall to a city of
Laconia, whose old name was Pharis as in Homer’s catalogue, but it was
called Pharæ by the Spartans and other neighbouring people. Marching
there he cut to pieces those who attempted to defend themselves, and
after carrying off much booty returned to Messene. And the Lacedæmonian
hoplites under Anaxander their king attacking him on the road, he
routed them also, and was fain to pursue Anaxander. But being wounded
in his hinder quarters with a javelin he stayed the pursuit, without
losing the plunder he had got. And after waiting sufficient time for
his wound to be healed, he intended to enter Sparta by night, when he
was prevented by the apparition of Helen and Castor and Pollux, and lay
in ambush at nightfall for some maidens who were dancing to Artemis at
Caryæ, and arrested all who were remarkable for the wealth and position
of their fathers, and brought them by night to a village in Messenia
and went to rest, having committed the custody of them to some men of
his regiment. Thereupon the young men in drink I suppose, and otherwise
unable to control their passions by reason, endeavoured to violate
the maidens, and when Aristomenes forbade them to act in a manner
not customary for Greeks, they took no notice of him, so that he was
obliged to kill the most unruly of them. And the maidens he had taken
captive he let go for a good ransom with their honour safe.




CHAPTER XVII.


And there is a place in Laconia called Ægila, where is a temple of
Demeter. There Aristomenes and his soldiers, knowing that the women
were keeping festival to Demeter, wished to seize them: but as these
women inspired by the goddess made a bold defence, most of the
Messenians received wounds with the swords which they used to sacrifice
the victims with, and the sharp pointed spits on which they stuck their
meat to roast it. And Aristomenes they struck with their torches and
took him alive. However he escaped the same night to Messenia. They say
that Archidamea the priestess of Demeter had the guilt of letting him
escape. But she did not let him go for money, but was an old sweetheart
of his, and made out that Aristomenes had escaped by burning[57] his
bonds.

  And in the third year of the war, when an engagement was about
to take place at what was called _The Great Trench_, and when the
Arcadians had come from all their cities to help the Messenians,
the Lacedæmonians bribed Aristocrates, the son of Icetas, a native
of Trapezus, king and general of the Arcadians at this period. The
Lacedæmonians are the first we know of that bribed an enemy, and
the first that made renown in arms a thing to be purchased by money.
For before the Lacedæmonians violated honour in their war with the
Messenians, in regard to this treason of Aristocrates the Arcadian,
their fighting men were distinguished for bravery, and good fortune
from the deity. Afterwards too at Ægos-potamoi, when they opposed the
fleet of the Athenians, they certainly bribed Adimantus and other
Athenian Admirals. But in process of time upon the Lacedæmonians came
what is called the Retribution of Neoptolemus. For Neoptolemus the
son of Achilles, having slain Priam at the altar of _Household Zeus_,
was himself also slain at Delphi at the temple of Apollo, and--in
consequence of that--suffering what one had inflicted on another got
called the Retribution of Neoptolemus. For when the Lacedæmonians
were at the zenith of their power, and had destroyed the fleet of the
Athenians, and Agesilaus had reduced most of Asia Minor, then it was
not possible to strip the Mede of all his power, because the barbarian
circumvented them by sending money to Corinth and Argos and Athens
and Thebes, and what was called the Corinthian war was brought about
by this money, so that Agesilaus was compelled to leave Asia Minor.
And so the deity made to recoil upon themselves the wiliness that
the Lacedæmonians had displayed to the Messenians. And Aristocrates
when he had received money from Lacedæmon, at first hid his plans
from the Arcadians, but when they were on the eve of an engagement,
then he threw them into consternation, by telling them they were in
difficulty and straits and had no means of retreat if they should be
beaten. He also said the sacrifices were not auspicious. He ordered
everyone therefore to run away when he gave the signal. And when the
Lacedæmonians began the engagement and the Messenians were opposite
to them, thereupon at the commencement of the battle Aristocrates
led off the Arcadians, and thus the Messenian centre and left wing
was left exposed. For the Arcadians had occupied both these parts of
the field, as the people of Elis were not present at the battle, nor
the people of Argos and Sicyon. And Aristocrates put the finishing
touch to his treason by fleeing through the Messenian lines. And they
were quite bewildered at the unexpected state of affairs, and were
disturbed by the passage of the Arcadians through their lines, so that
most of them nearly forgot what they were about: for instead of the
Lacedæmonians pressing on against the Arcadians they saw them fleeing,
and some begged them to stand their ground, others reviled them as
traitors and covenant-breakers. And for the Lacedæmonians to surround
the Messenians who were now left alone was easy enough, and with the
greatest ease they won a victory that was a foregone conclusion. And
though Aristomenes and his division bravely stood their ground against
the multitude of the Lacedæmonians that pressed against them, and
endeavoured to keep them in check, yet they were too few to avail
much. And such a quantity of Messenians were cut to pieces, that they,
who had expected to be masters of the Lacedæmonians, now instead of
having slaves had hardly any hope of safety. And of their leaders fell
Androcles and Phintas and others, and Phanas, (who fought especially
bravely, and had been victor at Olympia in the double course). And
Aristomenes after the battle collected the Messenian fugitives, and
persuaded them to leave Andania and any other towns in the heart of the
country, and to take up their residence on the mountain Eira. And when
they assembled there they were besieged by the Lacedæmonians who wished
to take them. However they resisted and held out for eleven years after
the disaster at _The Great Trench_. That that was the time the blockade
lasted is plain from the verses of Rhianus about the Lacedæmonians.

    “Along the ridges of the mountain white
    Twenty-two summers and winters did they fight.”

The word used for _summers_ in the line just above is a word properly
meaning the grass when it is ripe, or a little before hay harvest.




CHAPTER XVIII.


And the Messenians when they were hemmed in at Eira, and debarred the
rest of their country, except what was occupied by the people of Pylos
near the sea, and the people of Mothone, plundered Laconia and their
own country, which they now regarded as enemy’s country. And several
joined them in these raids, as chance brought it about, and Aristomenes
got together some picked men in number about 300. They harried and
carried off from the Lacedæmonians whatever they could, corn and flocks
and wine, but furniture and human beings they ransomed for money. So
that the Lacedæmonians made a decree, inasmuch as they were farming
for the benefit of the people of Eira rather than their own, not to
cultivate Messenia and the neighbouring parts of Laconia till after
the war. And from that time there was scarcity in Sparta, and with the
scarcity came riots, for those who got their money by farming could
not bear to see their lands lie fallow, but their vexation was checked
by the verses of Tyrtæus. And Aristomenes with his picked men made a
sally when the night was considerably advanced, and stole a march upon
the enemy by getting to Amyclæ before daybreak, and seized the fort and
plundered Amyclæ, and was off again before help could come from Sparta.
And he afterwards overran the whole country, till making an attack
on more than half the Lacedæmonian army under both their kings, he
received several wounds as he defended himself valiantly, and as he was
struck on the head by a stone his eyes got dizzy, and the Lacedæmonians
rushing at him all together took him alive. Fifty of his men also
were captured. These were all condemned by the Lacedæmonians to be
thrown into their underground cavern called Ceadas; where they throw
in their greatest malefactors. The other Messenians who were thrown in
were killed instantaneously: but Aristomenes had some good genius who
both now and on all occasions looked after him. Those who exaggerate
everything about him say that, when he was thrown into Ceadas, an eagle
flew under him and supported him with its wings, so that he reached
the bottom safely without a wound or scratch. The god on this occasion
must have also shown him some outlet. For when he got to the bottom of
the cavern, he sat down and muffling his head in his cloak expected
death which he felt certain. But on the third day after he heard a
noise, and unveiled his face, and when his eyes got accustomed to the
darkness, saw a fox preying on the dead carcases. And reflecting that
it must have an outlet somewhere, he waited till the fox came near and
when it came near seized hold of it, and in one of his hands, when the
fox turned on him, held his cloak that it might bite that and not him.
As it ran he ran with it, and was dragged by it along a very difficult
path. At last he saw a little hole, just big enough for a fox to pass
through, and light glimmered through it. And the fox, directly it was
liberated by Aristomenes, betook itself to its hole. And Aristomenes,
as the hole was too small to let him through, enlarged it with his
hands and got home safe to Eira, having had most remarkable good
fortune in respect to his capture, (for his spirit and bravery were
such that no one could have expected to take him alive), and stranger
still and most plainly not without divine assistance was this getting
out safe from Ceadas.




CHAPTER XIX.


And it was almost immediately reported to the Lacedæmonians by
deserters that Aristomenes had got home safe: but being considered as
incredible as if anyone were to say that a dead man had come to life
again, it was only believed in consequence of the following transaction
on the part of Aristomenes. The Corinthians sent a force to help the
Lacedæmonians to take Eira. Aristomenes, learning from his scouts
that they were marching rather carelessly, and that their camps were
negligently made up, attacked them by night, and as they were asleep
slew most of them, and among others their leaders Hypermenides, and
Achladæus, and Lysistratus, and Sidectus. He plundered also the tent of
the generals, and the Lacedæmonians soon saw that it was Aristomenes
and no other Messenian that had done all this. He sacrificed also to
Zeus of Ithome the sacrifice which they call Hecatomphonia. It was of
very remote antiquity, and any Messenian who had killed 100 enemies
had a right to offer it. And Aristomenes first offered this sacrifice
when he fought the battle at _Boar’s Memorial_, and the slaughter of
these Corinthians by night gave him the right to offer this sacrifice
a second time. They say also that he offered the sacrifice a third
time as the result of various raids. But the Lacedæmonians, as the
festival of Hyacinthus was now coming on, made a truce of 40 days with
the inhabitants of Eira, and returned home and kept the festival, and
some Cretan bowmen, who had been sent for as mercenaries from Lyctus
and other towns, made incursions into various parts of Messenia. And as
Aristomenes was at some distance from Eira, feeling perfect security
as it was truce time, seven of these bowmen lay in wait for him, and
took him prisoner, and bound him with the bands of their quivers. And
it was evening. And two of them went to Sparta, and announced the
capture of Aristomenes to the Lacedæmonians: and the remaining five
retired to a farm in Messenia, where a fatherless maiden lived with
her mother. The night before this maiden had had a dream. Some wolves
(she dreamed) brought a lion to the farm bound and without claws,
and she freed the lion from its bonds and got it claws, and then the
wolves were torn in pieces by it. And now when the Cretans brought in
Aristomenes, the maiden remembered her dream of the previous night,
and asked her mother who he was: and when she learnt who he was she
took courage, and looked earnestly at him, and understood the meaning
of the dream. She therefore poured out wine freely for the Cretans,
till drink overpowered them, and then withdrew the sword of the one who
was fastest asleep. Then she cut the bonds of Aristomenes, and he took
the sword and killed all 5. And Gorgus the son of Aristomenes took the
maiden to wife. And thus Aristomenes requited to the damsel her saving
of his life, and Gorgus was only 18 when he married her.




CHAPTER XX.


But in the 11th year of the siege it was fated that Eira should fall,
and that the Messenians should be dispersed, and the god accomplished
what had been oracularly foretold to Aristomenes and Theoclus. For
when they went to Delphi after the disaster at _the Great Trench_, and
enquired as to their safety, the Pythian Priestess replied as follows,

    “When he-goat drinks of Neda’s winding stream,
    I cease to guard Messene. Her end is near.”

Now the Neda rises in Mount Lycæus: and the river flows through Arcadia
and into Messenia again, and divides the maritime parts of Messenia
and Elis. And now they were afraid of their he-goats drinking of the
Neda: but the god had quite a different meaning which I will unfold.
The wild fig tree, which some of the Greeks call Olynthe, is called
by the Messenians Tragus (that is _He-Goat_). At this time there was
a wild fig tree on the banks of the river Neda which did not grow
upright, but bent into the stream and touched the water with its
topmost boughs. And the seer Theoclus having noticed it conjectured
that by the he-goat drinking of the Neda the Pythian Priestess meant
this wild fig, and that therefore the fate of Messene was imminent.
And he preserved silence on the matter to everyone else, but he took
Aristomenes to this fig tree, and pointed out to him that their period
of safety had passed. And Aristomenes was convinced by him that it was
as he said, and that that there was no room for delay, and he adopted
the following contrivance under the present conjuncture. The Messenians
had some sacred records, which if lost would ruin Messene and keep
her under for ever, but which if preserved would, according to the
oracular utterances of Lycus the son of Pandion, give the Messenians
a chance one day to recover their country, and Aristomenes knowing
these oracular utterances conveyed away by night these _arcana_:
and going to the most unfrequented part of Mount Ithome buried them
there, and prayed to Zeus of Ithome and to the gods who had hitherto
befriended the Messenians to be witnesses of this deposit, and not to
allow the Lacedæmonians to rob them of their only hope of returning
home again one day. And after this trouble came to the Messenians, as
earlier still it did to the Trojans, from adultery. They occupied the
mountainous district all round Eira as far as the Neda, and some lived
outside the gates. And no other deserter came to them from Laconia, but
a herdsman, a slave of Emperamus who was a man of some note at Sparta.
This herdsman lived not far from the Neda. There he saw the wife of one
of the Messenians who lived outside the walls coming to draw water: and
he got enamoured of her, and ventured to talk with her, and overcame
her chastity by gifts. And from that time forward this herdsman watched
when her husband went upon garrison duty. Now the Messenians had to go
on guard by turns in the citadel: it was here that they were chiefly
afraid of the enemy getting into the place. And whenever the husband
mounted guard, this herdsman used to go and visit his wife. And on one
occasion he and others had to mount guard at night, and it chanced
to be a very wet night. And the Messenians left their guard. For the
quantity of rain pouring down almost forced them in, as they had no
battlements or turrets in their improvised fortifications, and at the
same time they did not expect that the Lacedæmonians would attack them
in a night so wild and dark. And Aristomenes had been wounded a few
days previously in rescuing a Cephallenian merchant and his goods,
(he was a friend of his and used to introduce into Eira all necessary
supplies, but had been captured by the Lacedæmonians and some Apteræan
bowmen under Euryalus a Spartan), and therefore could not as usual
go his nightly rounds. This was the chief reason why the citadel was
abandoned by the guard. And as each of them went off from his post so
did the husband of the woman who had this intrigue with the herdsman.
And she at this time had the herdsman at her house, but perceiving the
return of her husband quickly concealed him, and welcomed her husband
rather more than usual, and asked him the reason of his return. And he,
ignorant that she was unfaithful to him and had her paramour there,
told her the truth, and said that, on account of the violence of
the rain, and other circumstances which he mentioned, they had left
their posts. And the herdsman overheard, and immediately, when he
understood the condition of affairs, deserted the Messenians for the
Lacedæmonians. The Lacedæmonian kings were at this time absent from
the camp: but Emperamus the master of the herdsman was commander in
chief of the forces that were besieging Eira. The herdsman then went
to his master, and first begged pardon for his absence from home,
and next showed him how they could capture Eira, mentioning all the
circumstances which he had heard from the Messenian.




CHAPTER XXI.


What the herdsman said seemed trustworthy, and he led Emperamus and
the Spartan force. Their march was difficult owing to the darkness and
steady downpour. Still they advanced with alacrity, and, as soon as
they got to the citadel of Eira, fixed scaling ladders and got over the
walls with all dispatch. And the Messenians had several indications
of their coming trouble, especially the unusual barking of the dogs,
who barked fiercely and continuously. Perceiving then that the final
struggle had come upon them, they had no time for arming themselves
properly, but each seized what weapon he could find to defend their
last possession out of all Messenia, their last inch of fatherland!
The first who noticed that the enemy had got inside the walls, and
who rushed up to the fray, were Gorgus the son of Aristomenes, and
Aristomenes himself, and Theoclus the seer and Manticlus his son,
and with them Euergetidas a man held in especial honour at Messene,
who had improved his fortunes by his marriage with Agnagora, the
sister of Aristomenes. And all the others at this time, though they
perceived that they were in a trap, yet had a little hope in spite of
the outlook: but Aristomenes and the seer knew that it was all up with
the Messenians, remembering the Pythian Priestess’ oracle about the
he-goat, but they concealed none the less the true state of affairs,
and were silent about it to everybody. And they went all round the
town energetically and exhorted every Messenian they met to play the
man, and called from their houses those that yet remained in them.
During the night nothing very notable was done on either side, for the
attacking party were hindered by their ignorance of the ground and
the boldness of Aristomenes, and the Messenians were rather backward
in taking the word from their generals, and if anyone lit a torch or
struck a light, the rain immediately put it out. And when day broke
and they could see one another clearly, then Aristomenes and Theoclus
endeavoured to nerve the Messenians to desperate courage, by giving
them the necessary directions, and reminding them of the heroism of the
people of Smyrna, who, though they were only Ionians, by their boldness
and vigour drove out of their city Gyges, the son of Dascylus, and the
Lydians who were in possession of it. And the Messenians hearing this
were animated with the courage of despair, and forming what ranks they
could rushed against the Lacedæmonians. And even the women eagerly
hurled tiles, and whatever each could lay hold of, at the enemy: but
they were partly prevented doing this from the slipperiness of the
roofs through the frequent rain: but they seized arms and thus kindled
still more the courage of the men, when they saw that even the women
preferred perishing with their country to being led off as slaves to
Lacedæmon, insomuch that had it been possible they would have given
destiny the go-by. And the downpour of rain continued all day, and
there was thunder and lightning, and they could hardly see for the
lightning that flashed in their faces. And all this inspired courage in
the Lacedæmonians, who thought that the god was visibly helping them,
and as the lightning was on their right the seer Hecas announced that
the omen was auspicious. He also devised the following stratagem. The
Lacedæmonians were far the most numerous, but inasmuch as the battle
was on a limited area and not fought tactically, but various bodies
of men fought haphazard in various parts of the city, it happened
that the rearmen of each division were useless. He therefore ordered
them to retire to the camp and get some food and sleep, and come back
again before evening to relieve their companions, who had borne the
burthen and heat of the day. And thus by fighting and resting by turns
they held out the longer, but the Messenians were getting entirely
worn out, for it was now the third night that they had been fighting
day and night continuously. And when the next morning came, and they
were suffering from sleeplessness and constant rain and cold all
combined, hunger and thirst assailed them too. Their women especially
were ready to faint by reason of being unused to war, and by the long
continuance of their efforts. Then the seer Theoclus came up and spoke
to Aristomenes. “Why do you continue in vain this struggle? It is
decreed that Messene must perish, long ago did the Pythian Priestess
foretell this imminent ruin, and lately did the wild fig tree teach the
same lesson. To me the god assigns an end with my country: but you may
save the Messenians and yourself.” When he had spoken thus to him, he
rushed against the foe, and said to the Lacedæmonians in a loud voice,
“You shall not for long joy in your conquest of Messene.” After that
he fiercely attacked those who were opposite to him and slew them, and
was himself wounded, and breathed out his last having first glutted
his soul with slaughter. And Aristomenes called all the Messenians
back from the fight, except those who were fighting with remarkable
bravery, whom he allowed to remain fighting. And the rest he ordered
to follow where he should lead, with the women and children in their
lines. To the command of this portion of the army he appointed Gorgus
and Manticlus: and himself took up a position in the front rank, and by
the motion of his head and the waving of his spear plainly showed that
he was asking for a passage through, and already meditated retreat.
Emperamus and the Spartans on the spot were right glad to let the
Messenians through their lines, and not to irritate too much men who
were mad in rage and desperate to the last degree. And Hecas the seer
also bade them act so.




CHAPTER XXII.


Directly the Arcadians heard of the capture of Eira, they at once
begged Aristocrates to lead them to save the Messenians or perish with
them. But he having been bribed by the Lacedæmonians refused to lead
them, and said that he knew none of the Messenians were alive for them
to assist. But when the Arcadians received more certain intelligence
that some survived who had been compelled to leave Eira, they set out
to meet them at Mount Lycæus, having got ready both food and raiment,
and sent certain influential persons to comfort the Messenians and
guide them on their march. And when they got safe to Mount Lycæus the
Arcadians welcomed them, and treated them kindly in other respects,
and invited them to dwell in their cities, and said they would give
them a share of the land. But Aristomenes in his grief for the capture
of Eira and his hatred to the Lacedæmonians contrived the following
plan. He selected from the whole body 500 Messenians, who he knew were
prodigal of their lives, and selected them in the hearing of the other
Arcadians and Aristocrates, not knowing that he was a traitor--for he
thought Aristocrates had fled through cowardice and want of manliness
rather than in treason--and he asked the 500 in his presence, whether
they would die with him to avenge their country. And when they said
they would he revealed his whole plan, that the following evening
he intended to lead them to Sparta. For at this time most of the
Lacedæmonians were at Eira, and others were busy in plundering the
property of the Messenians. “And if we should capture Sparta and keep
it,” continued Aristomenes, “we shall be able to exchange it for
Messene: and if we fail we shall die together, having done deeds that
posterity will not forget.” After he had made this speech, about 300
of the Arcadians wished to join him in his desperate undertaking.
And for the moment they delayed their departure, as the victims were
not auspicious. On the following day however they knew that their
secret had been revealed to the Lacedæmonians, and that they had been
betrayed by Aristocrates for the second time. For Aristocrates had
at once disclosed by letter the design of Aristomenes, and given the
letter to his most trusty slave, and sent it to Anaxander at Sparta.
And on his return this slave was intercepted by some Arcadians who had
previously been hostile to Aristocrates, and were now rather suspicious
about him. And having intercepted this slave they brought him before
the Arcadians, and showed the people the answer of Anaxander from
Lacedæmon. It was to the effect that, just as Aristocrates’ flight at
an opportune moment from _the Great Trench_ had not been unrewarded
by the Lacedæmonians, so he should not be without further reward for
his present information. And when this was reported to them all, the
Arcadians began to stone Aristocrates, and urged the Messenians to do
the same. But they looked at Aristomenes. And he looked on the ground
and wept. So the Arcadians stoned Aristocrates to death, and cast him
unburied out of their borders, and put up a pillar in the temple of
Lycæan Zeus with the following inscription. “Time is sure to bring
justice at last to an unjust king, and time with Zeus’ cooperation has
easily found out Messene’s traitor. It is difficult for a perjured man
to escape the god. Hail, royal Zeus, and save Arcadia.”




CHAPTER XXIII.


And all the Messenians that were captured at Eira, or in any other
part of Messenia, were incorporated by the Lacedæmonians among the
Helots: and the people of Pylos and Mothone and all the maritime towns
removed in ships, after the capture of Eira, to Cyllene the arsenal
of Elis. And from there they sent to the Messenians in Arcadia,
wishing them to join them in an expedition to seek some city to dwell
in, and bade them make Aristomenes the founder of the colony. But he
said that for his part as long as he lived he would fight against the
Lacedæmonians, and that he knew very well that Sparta would always have
trouble through him: but he gave them Gorgus and Manticlus as their
leaders. Euergetidas also retired to Mount Lycæus with the rest of
the Messenians: and from thence, when he saw that Aristomenes’ plan
about the capture of Sparta had fallen through, having got together
about 50 of the Messenians he made a raid against the Lacedæmonians at
Eira, and falling in with them still plundering he turned their chant
of victory into a dirge. And fate seized him there, and Aristomenes
ordered the leaders of the Messenians, and whoever wished, to take part
in the colony to go to Cyllene. And all took part in it, except those
that were prevented by old age, or were destitute of means for dwelling
abroad. And these remained where they were among the Arcadians.

  Eira was taken, and the second war between the Lacedæmonians and
the Messenians finished, in the Archonship over the Athenians of
Autosthenes, in the first year of the 28th Olympiad, in which Chionis
the Laconian was victor.

  And when the Messenians had got together at Cyllene, they resolved
to winter there for that winter, and the people of Elis provided them
with supplies and money: but directly Spring came they deliberated
where they should go. And the view of Gorgus was that they should
occupy Zacynthus beyond Cephallenia, and become islanders instead
of dwelling on the mainland, and should sail in their ships to the
maritime parts of Laconia and ravage their territory. Manticlus on
the other hand exhorted them to forget Messene and their animosity
to the Lacedæmonians, and sail to Sardinia and occupy that large and
fertile island. Meantime Anaxilas sent a message to the Messenians
inviting them to Italy. He was King at Rhegium, and fourth in descent
from Alcidamidas, who had migrated from Messene to Rhegium, after the
death of King Aristodemus and the capture of Ithome. This Anaxilas then
invited the Messenians, and when they went to Rhegium he told them
that the people of Zancle were at variance with him, and that they had
a fertile country and a city in the rich part of Sicily, all which he
said he would give them, and help them in conquering the country. And
as they eagerly accepted his offer, Anaxilas conveyed them over into
Sicily. Now Zancle was a place which had originally been occupied by
pirates, and, as the land there was then unoccupied, they built a fort
near the harbour, and made Zancle their headquarters for expeditions
both by land and sea: and their leaders were Cratæmenes the Samian
and Perieres from Chalcis. And eventually Perieres and Cratæmenes
resolved to invite in other colonists from Greece. But now Anaxilas
conquered the people of Zancle who put out to sea in their fleet, and
the Messenians conquered them on land. And being blockaded by land by
the Messenians and simultaneously by sea by the people of Rhegium, when
their fort was taken, they fled for refuge to the altars of the gods
and to the temples. Anaxilas however urged on the Messenians to slay
the suppliants, though they prayed hard for quarter, and to enslave the
rest together with their women and children. But Gorgus and Manticlus
begged that Anaxilas would not compel them, who had been shamefully
treated by their fellow-countrymen, to act with equal cruelty to
Greeks. And after that they took the people of Zancle from the altars,
and having mutually given and received pledges dwelt together as one
people. But the name of the town they changed from Zancle to Messene.
All this took place in the 29th Olympiad, in which Chionis the Laconian
was victor the second time, and Miltiades was Archon at Athens. And
Manticlus built a temple of Hercules for the new colony, and a statue
of the god was placed outside the fort called Hercules Manticlus, just
as Belus at Babylon got its name from an Egyptian called Belus, and
Ammon in Libya from the name of the shepherd who built the temple. This
was the end of the wandering of the Messenian exiles.




CHAPTER XXIV.


Meantime Aristomenes, when he refused the leadership of those who
were going on the new colony, married his sister Agnagora to Tharyx
of Phigalia, and his two eldest daughters to Damothoidas of Lepreum
and Theopompus of Heræum. And he himself went to Delphi and consulted
the oracle. What answer was returned is not recorded. But Damagetus a
native of Rhodes, the King of Ialysus, had also at this time come to
consult the oracle as to where he should marry a wife from, and the
Pythian Priestess replied that he was to marry the daughter of the
noblest of the Greeks. And Aristomenes had a third daughter, and he
married her, thinking her father far the noblest Greek of his time.
And Aristomenes went to Rhodes with his daughter, and from thence he
intended to go to Sardis to Ardys the son of Gyges, and to Ecbatana the
royal residence of the Medes to the Court of King Phraortes, but before
he could carry out this intention he chanced to die of some illness,
so that the fates did not permit him to wreak his vengeance on the
Lacedæmonians. And Damagetus and the people of Rhodes built a splendid
monument to him, and paid honours to his memory. The traditions about
those who are called the Diagoridæ in Rhodes, (who were descended
from Diagoras, the son of Damagetus, the son of Dorieus, the son of
Damagetus by the daughter of Aristomenes), I have omitted, that I might
not appear to have introduced irrelevant matter.

  And the Lacedæmonians, when they had made themselves masters of
Messenia, shared it out among themselves all but the territory of the
Asinæi, and Mothone they gave to the people of Nauplia who had recently
been ejected by the Argives.

  And the Messenians who were captured at Eira, and compulsorily
incorporated among the Helots, revolted again from the Lacedæmonians
in the 79th Olympiad, in which the Corinthian Xenophon was victor, and
Archimedes Archon at Athens. And they seized the following opportunity.
Some of the Lacedæmonians, on a charge for which they were condemned to
death, fled to Tænarum as suppliants; and there the Ephors took them
from the altar and slew them. And the wrath of Poseidon came upon those
Spartans who had violated his rights of sanctuary, and he adjudged the
town to be utterly razed to the ground. And it was after this calamity
that the Helots who were Messenians revolted and went to Mount Ithome.
And the Lacedæmonians sent for several allies to help to subdue them,
and among others for Cimon (the son of Miltiades) their friend, of whom
they also begged some Athenian troops. But when these Athenian troops
came they suspected them as likely to introduce revolutionary ideas
among their own men, so in their suspicion they soon sent them home
again from Ithome. But when the Athenians observed that suspicion on
the part of the Lacedæmonians they were indignant and became friendly
to the Argives, and, when those of the Messenians who were besieged at
Ithome were allowed to surrender upon conditions, gave Naupactus to
them, (having taken it from the Locrians in Ætolia called Ozolæ). And
the Messenians were allowed to surrender partly because of the strength
of the place, partly because the Pythian Priestess prophesied to the
Lacedæmonians that there would be vengeance from Zeus of Ithome if they
violated his right of sanctuary. So they were allowed to evacuate the
Peloponnese upon conditions for these reasons.




CHAPTER XXV.


And when they got Naupactus, they were not content with the town and
region that they had got through the Athenians, but a strong desire
came upon them to get a place for themselves by their own valour. And
as they knew that the Œniadæ, who had a rich soil in Acarnania, had
been for all time at variance with the Athenians, they marched against
them. And being not superior in point of numbers, but far superior in
respect to bravery, they won a victory over them, and shut them up
in their fort and blockaded them. And the Messenians employed every
human invention for taking cities, they tried to get over the walls by
scaling ladders, and undermined the fort, and bringing up such engines
as they could get at short notice kept battering away at the walls. And
those in the town, fearing that if the town was taken they would be
undone, and their wives and children sold into slavery, preferred to
surrender upon conditions. And for about a year the Messenians occupied
the town and enjoyed the produce of the country, but the year after the
Acarnanians gathering a force together from all their towns planned a
march upon Naupactus. But they changed their minds about this when they
saw that their march would be through the country of the Ætolians, who
were always hostile to them, and at the same time they expected the
Naupactians had a navy, as indeed they had, and as they were masters
of the sea it would not be possible to subdue them with a land army.
So they changed their plan with alacrity, and marched against the
Messenians at Œniadæ. And they began to lay siege to the town: for
they did not suppose that so few men would come to such a pitch of
recklessness as to sally out and fight against them. And the Messenians
had got together a store of corn and other provisions, expecting a
long siege: but they thought before the blockade commenced they would
have one good fight in the open, and as they were Messenians, who had
only been inferior to the Lacedæmonians in luck not in courage, they
would not be frightened at this mob that had come from Acarnania.
And the Athenians remembered the action at Marathon, how thirty
myriads of Medes were slain by less than 10,000. So they determined
to fight the Acarnanians, and the battle was fought as follows. The
Acarnanians inasmuch as they were far more numerous easily surrounded
the Messenians, except where the gates at the back of the Messenians
checked them, and the men on the walls stoutly defended their comrades.
Here they could not be surrounded. But both their flanks were sore
pressed by the Acarnanians, and they shot at them from all sides. And
the Messenians being a compact body, wherever they made a general
attack on the Acarnanians, threw the enemy’s ranks into confusion, and
killed and wounded many, yet could not bring about a complete rout.
For wherever the Acarnanians observed that their lines were pierced by
the Messenians, there they brought up large detachments of men, and
beat the Messenians back by sheer force of numbers. And whenever the
Messenians were unsuccessful in an attack, and tried in some other
place to break the Acarnanian line, the same result would follow. At
whatever point they attacked they produced confusion and something like
a rout, but the Acarnanians came swarming up, and so the Messenians had
very unwillingly to retire. And the struggle being very evenly poised
till night came on, and the attacking force of the Acarnanians being
augmented the following evening from several towns, a regular blockade
of the Messenians commenced. And they had no fear that the town would
be taken by storm, either by the Acarnanians getting over the walls,
or by their being compelled to desert their garrison duty. But by the
8th month all their supplies were consumed. To the Acarnanians they
jeeringly cried out that their provisions would last even a ten years’
siege: but about the time of first sleep they quietly slipped out of
Œniadæ, and being compelled to fight their way through directly the
Acarnanians got to know of this flitting, lost about 300 but killed
a still greater number of the enemy, and most of them succeeded in
cutting their way through, and by the assistance of the Ætolians who
were friendly to them got safe to Naupactus.




CHAPTER XXVI.


And from this time forward their hostility to the Lacedæmonians
increased, as they notably shewed in the war between the Peloponnesians
and Athenians. For they made Naupactus a base against the Peloponnese,
and when the Spartans were cut off at Sphacteria some Messenian bowmen
from Naupactus assisted the Athenians. But after the reverse of the
Athenians at Ægos-potamoi, the Lacedæmonians being masters of the sea
drove the Messenians from Naupactus, and some went into Sicily to their
kinsmen at Zancle and Rhegium, but most to Libya to the Euesperitæ,
who being hard pressed in war by some of the neighbouring barbarians
invited in the Greeks as colonists. To them went most of the Messenians
under Comon, who had been their General at Sphacteria.

  And a year before the Theban victory at Leuctra, the god foretold
to the Messenians their return to the Peloponnese. For the priest of
Hercules (they say) in Messene at the Sicilian Strait saw in a dream
Hercules Manticlus invited in a friendly way by Zeus to Ithome. And
among the Euesperitæ Comon dreamt that he had dealings with his dead
mother, and that subsequently his mother came to life again. And he
hoped as the Athenians were now powerful at sea that they would be
restored to Naupactus: and the dream seemed to indicate that Messene
would revive. And no long time after came to the Lacedæmonians at
Leuctra the disaster that had long been fated: for the concluding words
of the oracle given to Aristodemus the king of the Messenians were,

    “Do as fate bids: woe comes to all in turn.”

  As at that time it was fated for him and the Messenians to be
unfortunate, so in after time was it fated for Lacedæmon when her
day had come. And now the Thebans after the victory of Leuctra sent
messengers to Italy and Sicily and to the Euesperitæ, to recall the
Messenians from their wanderings to the Peloponnese. And they gathered
together quicker than anyone would have thought, from yearning
affection to their fatherland, and from their abiding hate to the
Lacedæmonians. And Epaminondas was in doubt what city he should build
as a base against the Lacedæmonians, or where he should find a site,
for the Messenians would not dwell again at Andania and Œchalia,
because they had been so unlucky when they lived there before. As
he was in this doubt they say an old man, very like a priest of
the mysteries, appeared to him in a vision of the night, and said
to him, “My gift to you is universal conquest in war: and when you
shall leave this earth I will make your name, O Theban, immortal and
ever glorious. But do you in return restore to the Messenians their
country and cities, for the wrath of Castor and Pollux towards them
is now appeased.” These were his words to Epaminondas, who revealed
the dream to Epiteles the son of Æschines, whom the Argives chose as
their General and the restorer of Messene. This man was bidden in a
dream, in the place where he should find at Ithome an ivy and myrtle
tree growing, to dig between them and recover an old woman who was
ill and confined there in a brass coffin and already near to death’s
door. And Epiteles when day broke went to the appointed place, and dug
up a cinerary urn of brass, and took it at once to Epaminondas and
narrated his dream, and he told him to remove the lid and see what was
in it. And he after sacrifice and prayer to the person who had sent him
this dream opened the urn, and found some tin beaten very thin, and
rolled up like a book. On it were written the mysteries of the Great
Goddesses, and it was in fact what Aristomenes had buried. And they say
the person who appeared to Epiteles and Epaminondas in their dreams
was Caucon, who formerly came from Athens to Andania to Messene the
daughter of Triopas.




CHAPTER XXVII.


The wrath of Castor and Pollux against the Messenians began before
the battle at Stenyclerus, and I conjecture it to have originated in
the following way. Panormus and Gonippus, two lads of Andania in the
bloom of youth, were great friends, and used jointly to make incursions
and raids into Laconia. And as the Lacedæmonians in camp were keeping
the festival of Castor and Pollux, and after the banquet were full of
wine and merrymaking, Gonippus and Panormus, clad in white tunics and
purple cloaks, well mounted, with hats on their heads and spears in
their hands, presented themselves to the Lacedæmonians. And when they
saw them they bowed down before them and worshipped them, thinking they
were Castor and Pollux who had come to the sacrifice. But these young
men mixed up with them and rode through them and stabbed many with
their lances, and, after many of them had fallen, rode back to Andania,
having thus outraged the festival of Castor and Pollux. This is what
I think made the Twin Brethren hate the Messenians. But now, as was
hinted to Epaminondas in his dream, the Twin Brethren had no objection
to the return of the Messenians. And Epaminondas was very greatly
encouraged also to the restoration of Messene by the oracles of Bacis,
who had been driven mad by the Nymphs and had given various prophetic
utterances to several of the Greeks, and amongst others this one about
the return of the Messenians:

    “And then shall Sparta lose her glorious flower,
    Messene built again be for all time.”

I find also that Bacis foretold the manner in which Eira would be
taken: this is one of his prophetic lines,

    “Those from conquered Messene with its splashing fountains.”

And as the records of the Mysteries had been recovered, the priests
entered them in books. And Epaminondas, as the place where the
Messenians now have their capital seemed most convenient to settle
in, bade the seers examine if the gods were favourable to the spot.
And on their replying that the omens were favourable, he at once made
preparations for building the town, ordering a large supply of stone,
and sending for builders who should artistically lay out streets and
build houses and temples and lines of walls. And when all was in
readiness the Arcadians furnished victims, and Epaminondas and the
Thebans sacrificed to Dionysus and Apollo Ismenius in the accustomed
manner, and the Argives to Argive Hera and Nemean Zeus, and the
Messenians to Zeus of Ithome and Castor and Pollux, and the priests of
the Mysteries to the Great Goddesses and Caucon. And with one consent
they invoked the heroes to come and dwell with them, especially Messene
the daughter of Triopas, and Eurytus and Aphareus and his sons, and
of the Heraclidæ Cresphontes and Æpytus. But most unanimous of all
was the cry for Aristomenes. And that day they devoted to sacrifices
and prayers, and on the following days they raised the circuit of
the walls, and began to build their houses and temples inside the
walls. And they carried on this work only to the music of Bœotian
and Argive flutes, and the tunes of Sacadas and Pronomus now first
came into competition. And they called the capital Messene, and they
restored others of their towns. But the people of Nauplia were not
turned out of Mothone, the Asinæi also were allowed to remain where
they were, the latter out of gratitude because they had refused to
join the Lacedæmonians against them. And the people of Nauplia, when
the Messenians returned to the Peloponnese, had brought them as gifts
whatever they had, and had continually prayed to the deity for their
return, and had also made many requests to the Messenians for their own
safety.

  Thus the Messenians returned to the Peloponnese, and were restored
to their country, 287 years after the capture of Eira, when Dyscinetus
was Archon at Athens, and in the third year of the 102nd Olympiad, in
which Damon of Thurii won the second prize. It was indeed no short
time that the Platæans were exiles from their country, or the Delians
when (expelled from Delos by the Athenians) they dwelt at Adramyttium.
The Minyæ from Orchomenus also, having been driven out by the Thebans
from Orchomenus after the battle of Leuctra, were restored to Bœotia by
Philip the son of Amyntas, as the Platæans also. And although Alexander
stript Thebes of Thebans, yet not many years afterwards Cassander
the son of Antipater rebuilt it. The exile from Platæa seems to have
been the longest of those which I have recorded, however it was not
longer than two generations. But the Messenians were wanderers from
the Peloponnese for nearly 300 years, during which time it is evident
that they abandoned none of their national customs, nor did they change
their Doric dialect, but even to our day they preserve it purer than
any other of the Peloponnesians.




CHAPTER XXVIII.


On their return no apprehension was felt by them at first about the
Lacedæmonians: for they, being afraid of the Thebans, did not interfere
with the rebuilding of Messene, nor the gathering of the Arcadians
into one town. But when the Phocian War, otherwise called the Holy
War, withdrew the Thebans from the Peloponnese, then the Lacedæmonians
pricked up their courage, and could no longer keep their hands off the
Messenians. And the Messenians bore the brunt of the war alone, except
the assistance they got from the Argives and Arcadians; they also
begged for help from the Athenians,--but they replied that they could
not join them in an incursion into Laconia, but if the Lacedæmonians
were the aggressors and carried the war into Messenia, then they
promised that they would not fail them. And eventually the Messenians
got the help of Philip, the son of Amyntas, and the Macedonians, and
this they say prevented them from participation in the struggle of the
Greeks at Chæronea. Not that they would ever have been inclined to take
up arms against the Greeks. But after the death of Alexander, when the
Greeks commenced a second war against the Macedonians, the Messenians
took their part in this, as I have before shewn in my account of
Attica. But they did not join the Greeks in fighting against the
Galati, as Cleonymus and the Lacedæmonians would not make a treaty with
them.

  And not long afterwards the Messenians occupied Elis, partly by
cunning partly by audacity. The people of Elis in ancient times were
the most orderly of all the Peloponnesians, but when Philip the son
of Amyntas did all that harm to Greece that we have mentioned, and
corrupted by bribes the most influential of the people of Elis, then
for the first time in their history the people of Elis took up arms and
became factious. And after they had taken the first plunge, they were
likely with less reluctance to go into future civil strife, inasmuch as
through the Lacedæmonians their policy had been shifted, and they had
drifted into civil war. And the Lacedæmonians hearing of the factions
at Elis made preparations to assist those who were for their party. And
while they were drilling and mobilizing their forces, about 1000 picked
men of the Messenians secretly approached Elis, with Lacedæmonian
colours on their shields. And when the men in Elis who were friendly
to the Spartans saw their shields, they concluded they had come to
help them and admitted them within the walls. But when the Messenians
got in, in the way I have described, they expelled from the town the
Lacedæmonian party, and entrusted the town to their own friends. Their
stratagem was Homeric, and the Messenians seem to have imitated Homer
for the nonce, for Homer has represented in the Iliad Patroclus wearing
the armour of Achilles, and how the Trojans, thinking that Achilles
was leading the attack, were thrown into confusion in their van. Other
stratagems of war are found in Homer, as when he describes two Greek
spies coming to the Trojans by night instead of one, and afterwards a
supposed deserter coming to Troy really to spy out the weak points.
Moreover he represents those Trojans who were either too young or
too old to fight as manning the walls, while those of a suitable age
took the field against the Greeks. And those of the Greeks that were
wounded gave their armour to other fighting men, that their services
too might not be altogether lost. Thus Homer’s ideas have been
generally useful to mankind.




CHAPTER XXIX.


And no long time after this action at Elis the Macedonians under
Demetrius, the son of Philip the son of Demetrius, attacked Messene.
Most of the audacity displayed by Perseus against Philip and his son
Demetrius I have already described in my account about Sicyon: and the
capture of Messene took place as follows. Philip was in need of money,
and, as he must have it by hook or by crook, sent Demetrius with a
fleet to the Peloponnese. And Demetrius chanced to put in at one of
the least frequented harbours of Argolis: and without losing time he
led his army by the shortest cuts through the country to Messene. And
having posted in the van all his light-armed troops, as he was well
acquainted with the road to Ithome, he got stealthily into the town
a little before dawn, and took up his position between the town and
the citadel. And when day broke and those in the town perceived their
imminent peril, their first thought was that the Lacedæmonians had got
into the town, so they rushed against them with the greatest alacrity
owing to their ancient animosity. But when both from their arms and
language they discovered that they were Macedonians under Demetrius
the son of Philip, a panic came over them, when they considered the
military renown of the Macedonians, and the good fortune which they had
invariably had. However the magnitude of the impending danger suggested
to them an almost supernatural bravery, and at the same time the hope
to see better days supported them: for they could not but think their
return to the Peloponnese after so long an exile was not against the
will of the Deity. The Messenians therefore in the town rushed against
the Macedonians with impetuosity, and the garrison in the citadel
galled them from their higher position. The Macedonians from their
courage and tactical skill fought at first like lions: but at last
spent with their long march, and not only pressed hard by men, but
pelted with tiles and stones by the women, fled in disorder. And most
of them perished miserably, being pushed down the rocks, for Ithome was
very precipitous here, but a few threw away their arms and got off safe.

  What prevented the Messenians from joining at first the Achæan League
was as follows. They had of their own accord gone to the aid of the
Lacedæmonians when they were attacked by Pyrrhus the son of Æacus, and
for this good service there were already friendlier relations between
themselves and Sparta. They did not therefore wish to revive the old
feud by going to the Achæan League, as the Achæans were most openly
hostile to the Lacedæmonians. And what has not escaped my notice, and
cannot have escaped the notice of the Messenians is that, even had
there been no Achæan League, the Achæans would have been hostile to
the Lacedæmonians, for among the Achæans the Argives and Arcadians
were no small element. In process of time however the Messenians
joined the Achæan League. And not long afterwards Cleomenes, the son
of Leonidas and grandson of Cleonymus, took Megalopolis the chief
town of the Arcadians in truce time. In the capture of the town about
a third of the inhabitants were captured or slain, but Philopœmen
the son of Craugis and those who escaped with him (and they say that
rather more than two thirds of the people of Megalopolis got away) were
kindly received by the Messenians, partly on account of the ancient
friendliness which the Arcadians had first exhibited in the days of
Aristomenes, and partly in consequence of the part they had taken
in the rebuilding of Messene. The Messenians even went so far as to
assign to the Arcadians equal rights to themselves. Such vicissitudes
and changes are there in all human affairs, that the deity put it into
the power of the Messenians to preserve in turn the Arcadians, and
(what was still less to be expected) one day to capture Sparta. For
when they fought against Cleomenes at Sellasia they joined Aratus and
the Achæans in taking Sparta. And when the Lacedæmonians had got rid
of Cleomenes, there rose up against them the tyrant Machanidas: and
after his death Nabis sprang up as tyrant over them. And, as he not
only plundered men but also sacrilegiously robbed the holy places, in
no long time he amassed considerable sums of money, and got together
with this money an army. And when he occupied Messene Philopœmen and
the people of Megalopolis made a sally by night, and the Spartan tyrant
departed on conditions. And the Achæans after this, in consequence of
some difference with the Messenians, marched out against them in full
force, and ravaged their territory. And again about harvest time they
collected a force for the purpose of attacking Messenia, but Dinocrates
a prominent man among the people, who had been recently elected ruler
of the Messenians, forced Lycortas and the army with him to retire
without effecting their object, and having occupied the byroads between
Messenia and Arcadia he protected[58] the Messenians in their town
and in all the neighbouring districts. And when Philopœmen with a few
cavalry came a little later than the army of Lycortas, not having
been able to gather any tidings about them, the Messenians having the
advantage of ground beat them in battle, and took Philopœmen alive. And
the manner of his capture and his death I shall relate hereafter in my
account of Arcadia. Suffice it here to state that those Messenians who
were guilty of the death of Philopœmen were punished, and Messene again
joined the Achæan League.

  Hitherto I have had to deal with the many sufferings of the
Messenians, and to describe how the Deity, having scattered them to
the ends of the earth, and to places most remote from the Peloponnese,
restored them to their own country a long time afterwards. And now let
us turn to a description of the country and its towns.




CHAPTER XXX.


There is in our days in Messenia, about 20 stades from the Chœrian
dell, a town by the sea called Abia. They say in old times it was
called Ire, and that it was one of the seven towns, which Homer
represents Agamemnon as promising to Achilles. And when Hyllus and
the Dorians were conquered in battle by the Achæans, then they say
Abia, the nurse of Glenus the son of Hercules, went to Ire, and there
lived, and built a temple of Hercules, and for that reason Cresphontes
afterwards assigned her several honours, and changed the name of
the town to her name Abia. There were notable temples there both to
Hercules and Æsculapius.

  And Pharæ is distant from Abia about 80 stades, and the water by the
road is salt. The Emperor Augustus ordered the Messenians at Pharæ to
be ranked under Laconia. The founder of the city was they say Pharis,
the son of Hermes by Phylodamea the daughter of Danaus. And Pharis they
say had no male children, but only a daughter Telegone. The direct
line of genealogy has been given by Homer in the Iliad, who says that
the twins Crethon and Ortilochus were the sons of Diocles, and that
Diocles himself was the son of Ortilochus, the son of Alpheus. But
he has said nothing about Telegone, who according to the Messenian
tradition was the wife of Alpheus and mother of Ortilochus. I have
also heard at Pharæ that Diocles had a daughter Anticlea as well as
his twin sons, and that she bare Nicomachus and Gorgasus to Machaon
the son of Æsculapius: they lived at Pharæ, and after the death of
Diocles succeeded to the kingdom. And a constant tradition about them
has prevailed even to this day, that they have the power of healing
illnesses and people maimed in body. And because of this the people
sacrifice to them and offer votive offerings. At Pharæ there is also a
temple and ancient statue of Fortune. The first person that I know of
that has mentioned Fortune is Homer. He has mentioned her in his Hymn
to Demeter, when enumerating the other daughters of Oceanus, how they
played with Demeter’s daughter Proserpine, and among them Fortune, also
a daughter of Oceanus. These are the lines.[59] “We all were in the
pleasant meadow, Leucippe, Phæno, Electra, and Ianthe, Melobosis, and
Fortune, and Ocyroe of the beautiful eyes.” But he has said nothing
further about her, how she is the greatest goddess in human affairs
and has the greatest influence, as in the Iliad he represented Athene
and Enyo as supreme in war, and Artemis as dreaded in childbirth, and
Aphrodite as the goddess of marriages. He has not symbolized Fortune in
this way. But Bupalus, a man of wonderful ability in building temples
and making models of animals, is the first person we know of that made
a statue of Fortune. His was for the people of Smyrna. Fortune has a
globe on her head, and in one of her hands what is called by the Greeks
the horn of Amalthea. Thus did he typify the actions of this goddess.
Pindar also subsequently wrote various lines about Fortune, and named
her City-Preserver.




CHAPTER XXXI.


Not far from Pharæ is the grove of Carnean Apollo, and a fountain of
water in it, and Pharæ is about six stades from the sea. As you go
from thence into the interior of Messenia about 80 stades you come to
the town of Thuria,--which they say Homer called Anthea in his verses.
And Augustus gave Thuria to the Spartans. For when the future Emperor
of Rome was at war with Mark Antony, several Greeks and especially
Messenians fought for Antony because the Lacedæmonians espoused the
side of Augustus. Accordingly Augustus punished the Messenians and
others who had opposed him, some more some less. And the people of
Thuria left their ancient city which was built on a height, and went
and dwelt in the plain. Not that they altogether abandoned the upper
city, for there are ruins of their walls and a temple there called the
temple of the Syrian goddess. And a river called Aris flows by their
town in the plain.

  And there is in the interior a village called Calamæ and a place
called Limnæ: in the latter place is a temple of Artemis of Limnæ,
where they say Teleclus the king of Sparta was killed. And as you go
from Thuria in the direction of Arcadia are the sources of the river
Pamisus, in which small boys by being dipped are cured of diseases. And
as you go to the left from these sources of the river and go forward
about 40 stades, you come to the city of the Messenians under Mount
Ithome: which is encircled not only by Mount Ithome but also in the
direction of the Pamisus by Mount Eva. The mountain they say was called
Eva from the Bacchic cry Evœ, which Dionysus and his attendant women
first uttered here. And round Messene is a circular wall entirely
constructed of stone, and towers and battlements are built on it. As to
the walls of the Babylonians, or those called Memnon’s in Susa amongst
the Persians, I have neither seen them nor heard anything of them
from eye witnesses: but I can confidently affirm that the wall round
Messene is stronger than those at Ambrosus in Phocis or at Byzantium
or at Rhodes. And in the market-place at Messene there is a statue of
Zeus Soter, and a conduit called Arsinoe, which got its name from the
daughter of Leucippus, and water flows underground to feed it from a
well called Clepsydra. And the gods who have temples are Poseidon and
Aphrodite. And the most notable thing is a statue of the Mother of the
Gods in Parian marble by Damophon, who most artistically rivetted the
Zeus at Olympia when the ivory got loose. And honours were bestowed
upon him by the people of Elis. He too designed the statue that the
people of Messene call Laphria: whom they are accustomed to worship for
the following reason. Among the Calydonians, who worship Artemis most
of all the gods, her title is Laphria. And the Messenians who received
Naupactus from the Athenians, and lived consequently very near to
Ætolia, borrowed the worship of Artemis Laphria from the Calydonians.
The statue I shall describe elsewhere. The title Laphria is only
given to Artemis by the Messenians and the people of Patræ in Achaia.
Ephesian Artemis is the title which all cities recognize, and by which
men privately worship her as greatest of the gods; partly from the fame
of the Amazons, who are said to have established the worship of her
image, partly because she had a temple at Ephesus from time immemorial.
And three other things contributed to her glory also, the size of the
temple which exceeds all other human structures, the celebrity of the
city of Ephesus, and the splendour of the goddess’ shrine.

  At Messene there is also a temple and stone statue of Ilithyia. And
hard by is a hall of the Curetes, where they sacrifice all kinds of
living things alike. Beginning with bulls and goats, they even go as
far as to cast birds into the flames. There is also a temple sacred
to Demeter, and statues of Castor and Pollux represented as carrying
off the daughters of Leucippus. I have already shown in a previous
part of my work that the Messenians assert that Castor and Pollux are
indigenous with them and not with the Lacedæmonians. And they have many
statues well worth seeing in the temple of Æsculapius. For besides the
statues of the god and his sons, and besides those of Apollo and the
Muses and Hercules, there are statues of Thebes and Epaminondas the
son of Cleommis, and of Fortune and of Lightbringing Artemis. Those in
stone are the work of Damophon, the only Messenian statuary that I know
of that has produced any remarkable statues. The effigy of Epaminondas
in iron is by another hand. There is also at Messene a temple of
Triopas and her statue in gold and Parian marble: and the paintings at
the back of the temple are Aphareus and his sons, the kings of Messene
before the expedition of the Dorians to the Peloponnese, and after the
return of the Heraclidæ Cresphontes, the leader of the Dorians, and of
those that dwelt at Pylos Nestor and Thrasymedes and Antilochus, who
were preferred to the sons of Nestor partly because they were older,
partly because they had taken part in the Trojan expedition. There are
paintings also of Leucippus the brother of Aphareus, and of Hilaira,
Phœbe, and Arsinoe. There are paintings also of Æsculapius, (the son
of Arsinoe according to the tradition of the Messenians,) and Machaon
and Podalirius, for they also had a share in the expedition to Ilium.
These paintings were executed by Omphalion, the pupil of Nicias the son
of Nicomedes: some say that he was also the slave of Nicias and his
favourite.




CHAPTER XXXII.


The temple at Messene called the Sacrificial Chamber has statues of
the gods generally worshipped among the Greeks, and also an effigy of
Epaminondas in brass. There are also some ancient tripods, such as
Homer describes as not having experienced fire.[60] And the statues in
the gymnasium are the work of Egyptians, and are Hermes Hercules and
Theseus, who are wont to be held in honour at gymnasiums and palæstras
by all Greeks and by many barbarians. I also noticed a statue of
Æthidas who was a contemporary of mine but older, and as he was very
wealthy the Messenians paid him honours as a hero. None of the people
of Messene deny that Æthidas was wealthy, but some say it is not that
Æthidas who has a statue on the pillar, but a namesake and ancestor.
And this earlier Æthidas was they say the General of the Messenians,
when Demetrius the son of Philip and his army stole into the town by
night when they little expected it.

  There is here also the tomb of Aristomenes, and not a mere cenotaph,
if their account is correct. But when I inquired how and from what
place they brought home Aristomenes’ remains, they replied that they
sent for them from Rhodes, obeying the direction of the God at Delphi.
They also informed me of the sacrifices at this tomb. The bull they
intend to sacrifice they bring to the tomb, and fasten it to a pillar
near the tomb. And it being wild and unused to bonds is reluctant to
remain there. And if by its struggles and mad bounds the pillar is
moved, it is an auspicious omen to the people of Messene, but if it
is not moved it is an omen of misfortune. And they amuse themselves
with the fancy that Aristomenes though no longer alive was present at
the fight at Leuctra, and they say he fought for the Thebans, and was
the main cause of the Lacedæmonian defeat. I know that the Chaldæan
and Indian astrologers were the first who taught that the soul of man
is immortal, and several Greeks credited their assertion, and notably
Plato the son of Aristo. And whoever are willing to believe this cannot
deny the fact that the hatred of Aristomenes to the Lacedæmonians was
eternal. And what I heard in Thebes lent probability to the tradition
at Messene, though it does not altogether agree with their account.
The Thebans say that on the eve of the battle at Leuctra they sent to
several oracles, and among others to that of Trophonius at Lebadea. The
answers are extant which were received from Ismenian and Ptoan Apollo,
as also from Abæ and Delphi. But the response of Trophonius was in
4 hexameter verses. “Before contending with the foe erect a trophy,
decking out the shield, which the ardent Aristomenes of Messene placed
in my temple. I will assuredly destroy the host of hostile warriors.”
And on the arrival of this oracular response they say that Epaminondas
prevailed with Xenocrates to send for the shield of Aristomenes, and he
decked it out as a trophy in a place where it would be visible to the
Lacedæmonians. And some of them recognized the shield as they had seen
it in time of peace at Lebadea, and all knew of it by report. And after
the Thebans won their victory, they offered Aristomenes’ shield again
to Trophonius as a votive offering. There is also a brazen statue of
Aristomenes in the race-course at Messene. And not far from the theatre
is the temple of Serapis and Isis.




CHAPTER XXXIII.


And as you go towards the hill of Ithome, where the Messenians have
their citadel, is the spring called Clepsydra. However willing one
may be it is a matter of no small difficulty to enumerate all the
people who put in the claim that Zeus was born and bred among them.
The people of Messene have this tradition among others. They say that
Zeus was reared among them, and that Ithome and Neda were his nurses,
and that Neda gave her name to the river, and Ithome hers to the
mountain. And these Nymphs they say, when Zeus was stolen away by the
Curetes from fear of Cronos, washed him here at Clepsydra, and the
spring got its name from the theft of the Curetes: and every day they
take water from this spring to the temple of Zeus of Ithome. And the
statue of Zeus is the work of Ageladas, and was made originally for
the Messenians that dwelt at Naupactus. And a priest chosen annually
keeps the statue in his house. And they have an annual feast at Ithome,
and originally they had a musical contest, as one may infer from other
sources, but especially from the lines of Eumelus, which are part of
his Processional Hymn at Delos, “Welcome to Zeus of Ithome was the pure
muse with free sandals.” I think from these verses that Eumelus knew
that they had a musical contest at the Feast of Zeus of Ithome.

  At the gates in the direction of Megalopolis in Arcadia there is a
statue of Hermes of Athenian design: the busts of Hermes among the
Athenians are square, and others have borrowed this design from them.
And if you go about 30 stades down from these gates you come to the
river Balyra. It was so called they say because Thamyris threw his lyre
away there in his blindness, Thamyris the son of Philammon and the
nymph Argiope. Argiope they say lived at Parnassus for a while, but
when she became pregnant removed to Odrysæ, because Philammon would not
marry her. And this is the reason why they call Thamyris Odrysian and
Thracian. And the rivers Leucasia and Amphitus are tributaries of the
Balyra.

  After you have crossed these you come to the plain called the plain
of Stenyclerus; this Stenyclerus was a hero. And right opposite the
plain is what was called of old Œchalia, but in our day the Carnasian
grove, mostly of cypress trees. And the gods who have statues are
Carnean Apollo and Hermes carrying a ram. And the daughter of
Demeter is here called the Virgin, and near her statue water wells
from a spring. But the rites of the Great Goddesses, who have their
Mysteries at the Carnasian grove, I must not reveal: but they are in
my opinion second only in sanctity to the Eleusinian Mysteries. I
am also prevented by a dream from revealing to the public all about
the cinerary urn of brass found by the Argive General, in which
the remains of Eurytus the son of Melaneus are kept. And the river
Charadrus flows along the Carnasian grove, and as you go on about 8
stades to the left you come to the ruins of Andania. That the town was
so named from a woman called Andania is admitted by the antiquarians: I
know however nothing about her parents, or who she married. And on the
road from Andania to Cyparissiæ you come to a place called Polichne,
where the rivers Electra and Cœus flow. Perhaps the names of these
rivers refer to Electra the daughter of Atlas and to Cœus the father of
Leto, or Electra and Cœus are possibly some local heroes.

  And after crossing the Electra you come to the well called Achaia,
and the ruins of the city Dorium. And it is here at Dorium that Homer
has described Thamyris as having been stricken blind, because he said
he could excel the Muses in singing.[61] But Prodicus the Phocæan,
(if the poem called the Minyad is indeed his), says that punishments
were reserved for Thamyris in Hades because of his boastful language
to the Muses. But I am of opinion that Thamyris lost his eyesight
through disease: as indeed happened to Homer subsequently. But Homer
went on composing all his life, for he did not yield to his misfortune,
whereas Thamyris wooed the Muse no longer, completely overcome by his
ever-present trouble.




CHAPTER XXXIV.


From Messene to the mouth of the Pamisus is about 80 stades, and the
Pamisus flows clear and limpid through arable land, and is navigable
some 10 stades inland. And some sea fish swim up it especially at the
season of spring, as they do also up the rivers Rhenus and Mæander: but
mostly do they swim up the river Achelous, which has its outlet near
the islands called the Echinades. And the fish that swim up the Pamisus
are finer in appearance, because the water is clear, and not full of
mud like the other rivers I have mentioned. And mullets, being fishes
that love mud, are fond of muddy rivers. Now the Greek rivers do not
seem to produce beasts dangerous to man’s life, like the Indus, and
the Nile in Egypt, and the Rhenus, the Ister, the Euphrates, and the
Phasis. For they produce beasts that devour man, in appearance like the
Glanides at Hermus and Mæander, except that they have a darker skin and
more strength. In these respects the Glanides are deficient. And the
Indus and Nile both furnish crocodiles, and the Nile hippopotamuses
also, which are as destructive to man as the crocodile. But the Greek
rivers are not formidable for wild beasts, for even in the river Aous,
that flows through the Thesprotian mainland, the dogs are not river
dogs but sea dogs that swim up from the sea.

  On the right of the Pamisus is Corone, a town near the sea, and under
the mountain Mathia. And on the road to it is a place near the sea,
which they think is the temple of Ino: for they say that the goddess
landed here from the sea, and was worshipped by the name of Leucothea
instead of Ino. And at no great distance the river Bias discharges
itself into the sea, which river took its name they say from Bias the
son of Amythaon. About 20 stades from the road is the well Plataniston,
the water flows from a plane-tree, broad and hollow inside, and like a
small cave, and fresh water flows from thence to Corone. The name of
the town was of old Æpea, but after the Messenians were restored to the
Peloponnese by the Thebans, they say that Epimelides, who was sent to
rebuild it, called it Coronea, after Coronea in Bœotia where he came
from, but the Messenians mispronounced the name Corone from the first,
and in process of time their mistake became prevalent. There is also
another tradition that when they were digging the foundations of their
walls they found a brass crow.[62] The gods here who have temples are
Artemis called the Rearer of children, and Dionysus, and Æsculapius.
The statues of Æsculapius and Dionysus are of stone, and there is a
brazen statue of Zeus Soter in the market-place. There is also a brazen
statue of Athene in the citadel in the open air, with a crow in her
hand. I also saw the tomb of Epimelides. Why they call the harbour the
harbour of the Achæans I do not know.

  As you go on about 80 stades from Corone you come to a temple of
Apollo, near the sea, which is held in high honour: according to the
Messenian tradition it is the most ancient of all Apollo’s temples,
and the god heals diseases. They call the god Corydus.[63] His statue
here is of wood, but there is a brazen statue the work of Argeotas, a
votive offering they say of the Argonauts. And near the town of Corone
is Colonides. Its inhabitants say they were not Messenians but were
brought by Colænus from Attica, who according to an oracle followed the
crested lark there. And in process of time they picked up the Dorian
dialect and customs. And the town of Colonides is on a height not far
from the sea.

  And the people of Asine were originally neighbours of the Lycoritæ,
and dwelt near Mount Parnassus. They were then called Dryopes from
their founder, which name they retained when they came to the
Peloponnese. But in the third generation afterwards, when Phylas
was king, the Dryopes were beaten in battle by Hercules, and were
taken to Delphi and offered to Apollo. And being brought back to the
Peloponnese by the oracle which the god gave Hercules, they first
occupied Asine near Hermion, and, having been expelled thence by the
Argives, they dwelt in Messenia by permission of the Lacedæmonians,
and when in process of time the Messenians were restored they were not
turned out by them from Asine. And the account the people of Asine
themselves give is as follows. They admit they were conquered in battle
by Hercules, and that their town on Mount Parnassus was captured,
but they deny that they were led captive to Apollo, but when their
walls were taken by Hercules, they left their town they say and fled
for refuge to the heights of Parnassus; and afterwards crossing over
in ships to the Peloponnese became suppliants of Eurystheus, and he
being a bitter enemy of Hercules gave them Asine in Argolis to dwell
in. And the Asinæi are the only descendants of the Dryopes that still
plume themselves on that name, very unlike the Eubœans that live at
Styra. For they too are Dryopes by origin, who did not participate in
the contest with Hercules but dwelt at some distance from the town.
But they despise the name Dryopes, just as the inhabitants of Delphi
object to be called Phocians. Whereas the Asinæi rejoice in the name
of Dryopes, and have evidently made the holiest of their temples an
imitation of those they formerly erected at Mount Parnassus. They have
not only a temple of Apollo, but a temple and ancient statue of Dryops,
whose mysteries they celebrate annually, and say that he was the son of
Apollo. And Asine lies by the sea just as the old Asine in Argolis did,
and the distance from Colonides is about 40 stades, and at about the
same distance in the other direction is the Promontory of Acritas, just
in front of which is the deserted island of Theganussa. And not far
from Acritas is the harbour of Phœnicus and some islands called Œnussæ
opposite the harbour.




CHAPTER XXXV.


And Mothone, which before the expedition against Troy and even
subsequently to that war was called Pedasus, afterwards changed its
name to Mothone from the daughter of Œneus as the inhabitants say: for
Œneus the son of Porthaon after the capture of Ilium retired they say
with Diomede to the Peloponnese, and had by a concubine a daughter
Mothone. But in my opinion the Rock called Mothon gave its name to
Mothone, a rock which constitutes a natural harbour, for being much
of it sunken under the water it narrows the entrance for ships, and
at the same time is a kind of breakwater against the violence of the
waves. I have already described how the Lacedæmonians, in the days when
Damocratidas was king at Argos, gave Mothone to the people of Nauplia,
who had been expelled from their city for their Laconian proclivities;
and how even after the restoration of the Messenians they were not
interfered with. The people of Nauplia were I imagine in ancient times
Egyptians, and, having come to Argolis in their ships with Danaus,
they formed three generations afterwards a colony at Nauplia under
Nauplius the son of Amymone. And the Emperor Trajan granted the people
of Mothone a free constitution. But in older days they alone of all the
Messenians had the following serious misfortune. Thesprotia in Epirus
was in a ruinous condition from anarchy. For Deidamia the daughter of
Pyrrhus had no children, and on her death handed over the government
to the people. She was the daughter of Pyrrhus, the son of Ptolemy,
the son of Alexander, the son of Pyrrhus: of this last Pyrrhus the
son of Æacides I have given an account earlier in my description of
Attica. Procles the Carthaginian has given Alexander the son of Philip
more praise for his good fortune and the lustre of his exploits, but
for the disposition of an army and strategical tactics in the face of
an enemy he says Pyrrhus was the better man. And when the people of
Epirus became a democracy, they shewed a want of ballast in several
respects, and entirely disregarded their rulers: and the Illyrians
that dwelt north of Epirus by the Ionian sea became their masters by
sudden attack. For we know of no democracy but Athens that ever rose
to greatness. The Athenians indeed rose to their zenith by democracy:
but in native intelligence they were superior to the other Greeks, and
obeyed the laws more than democracies generally do.

  And the Illyrians, when they had once tasted the sweets of conquest,
longed for more and still more, and equipped a fleet, and made piratic
excursions everywhere, and sailed to Mothone and anchored there as
with friendly intent, and sent a messenger into the town and asked
for some wine for their ships. And when a few men brought this wine,
they paid for it the price the people of Mothone asked for it, and
sold them in turn some of their cargoes. And on the following day more
came from the city and a brisker traffic ensued. And at last women and
men came down to the ships, and sold wine and received goods in turn
from the barbarians. Then the Illyrians in the height of their daring
captured many men and still more women, and clapped them on board, and
sailed away for the Ionian sea, having half stripped the town of its
population.

  At Mothone is a temple of Athene _the Goddess of Winds_, Diomede they
say dedicated the statue of the goddess and gave her that title, for
violent winds and unseasonable used to blow over the place and do much
harm, but after Diomede prayed to Athene, no trouble from winds ever
came to them thenceforward. There is also a temple of Artemis here,
and some water mixed with pitch in a well, in appearance very like
Cyzicenian ointment. Water indeed can assume every colour and smell.
The bluest I have ever seen is at Thermopylæ, not all the water but
that which flows into the swimming-bath which the people of the place
call the women’s Pots. And reddish water very like blood is seen in
the land of the Hebrews near Joppa: the water is very near the sea,
and the tradition about the spring is that Perseus, after killing the
sea monster to whom the daughter of Cepheus was exposed, washed away
the blood there. And black water welling up from springs I have seen
at Astyra which is opposite Lesbos, the warm baths are in a village
called Atarneus, which was given to the Chians by the Medes as a reward
for giving up to them the suppliant Pactyas the Lydian. This water is
black: and not far from a town across the river Anio the Romans have
some white water: and when one bathes in it it is at first cold and
makes one shudder, but if one stays in it a little time it is hot as
fire. All these wonderful springs I have myself seen, and those of
lesser wonder I purposely pass over, for to find water salt and rough
to the palate is no great wonder. But there are two very remarkable
kinds of water: one at Caria in the plain called White, near a village
called Dascylus, warm and sweeter to drink than milk: and the other
Herodotus describes as a spring of bitter water discharging itself into
the river Hypanis. How then shall we refuse to credit that warm water
is found at Dicæarchia[64] among the Tyrrhenians, so hot that in a few
years it melts the lead through which it flows?




CHAPTER XXXVI.


From Mothone to the promontory of Coryphasium is about 100 stades, and
near it is Pylos, which was founded by Pylos, the son of Cleson, who
brought from Megaris the Leleges who then occupied Megaris. But he did
not enjoy it long, being turned out by Neleus and the Pelasgians of
Iolcus. And he went away to the neighbouring country and occupied Pylos
in Elis. And king Neleus advanced Pylos to such renown that Homer in
his Iliad calls it the city of Neleus.[65] There is a temple there of
Athene called Coryphasia, and a house called Nestor’s house, in which
is a painting of Nestor, and there is his tomb inside the city, and at
a little distance from Pylos is (they say) the tomb of Thrasymedes.
And there is a cave inside the city, which they say was the stall of
the oxen of Nestor and still earlier of Neleus. The breed of these
oxen would be Thessalian, of the herd of Iphiclus the father of
Protesilaus, for Neleus asked them as wedding presents from the wooers
of his daughter, and it was on their account that Melampus to gratify
his brother Bias went to Thessalia, and was bound by the herdsmen of
Iphiclus, but eventually by answering the questions which Iphiclus put
obtained these oxen as a reward. The men of that day were anxious to
amass wealth in the shape of herds of horses and oxen, for not only did
Neleus desire for his own the oxen of Iphiclus, but Eurystheus ordered
Hercules, in consequence of the fame of those oxen in Spain, to drive
off the herd that belonged to Geryon. And Eryx, who was at that time
king in Sicily, was manifestly so keenly in love with the oxen from
Erythea, that when he wrestled with Hercules he staked his kingdom
against them. And Homer in the Iliad has represented Iphidimas, the son
of Antenor, giving 100 oxen as the first wedding present to his father
in law.[66] All this confirms my theory that the men of those days
were especially fond of oxen. And the oxen of Neleus grazed I imagine
mostly over the borders, for the district of Pylos is mostly sandy,
and unable to afford sufficient pasture. My authority is Homer who,
whenever he mentions Nestor, always calls him the king of sandy Pylos.

  Before the harbour is the island Sphacteria, situated very much as
Rhenea is in reference to the harbour of Delos. It seems the destiny
of both men and places to be for a while unknown and then to come to
renown. Such was the case with Caphareus, a promontory in Eubœa, by a
storm which came there upon the Greeks returning with Agamemnon from
Ilium. So too with Psyttalea off Salamis, where we know the Medes
perished in great numbers. So too the reverses of the Lacedæmonians
at Sphacteria made the place world-famed. And the Athenians erected
a brazen statue of Victory in their Acropolis as a record of their
success at Sphacteria.

  And as you go in the direction of Cyparissiæ from Pylos there is a
spring under the city close to the sea. They say the water welled up
in consequence of Dionysus striking the ground with his thyrsus, and
so they call the spring Dionysus’ spring. There are also at Cyparissiæ
temples of Apollo and Cyparissian Athene. And at the place called Aulon
there is a temple of Æsculapius, and a statue of Aulonian Æsculapius.
From this place the river Neda, till it falls into the sea, is the
boundary between Messenia and Elis.




FOOTNOTES:

[53] Odyssey, xxi. 18.

[54] Odyssey, xxi. 15, 16.

[55] _Ibid._ iii. 488, 489.

[56] Iliad, ii. 729.

[57] This seems strange. Ingeniosissime διακόψας Corayus. Siebelis
defends the text. “Sacerdos, quo majus esset miraculum, videtur
dixisse, eum se advolvisse igni, eique admovisse vincula, usque dum
solverentur.”

[58] Reading ἤμυνεν.

[59] Hymn to Demeter, lines 417, 418, 420.

[60] See Hom. Il. ix. 122; xxiii. 267.

[61] Iliad, ii. 594-600.

[62] Crow in Greek is _Corone_. Hence the Paronomasia.

[63] That is, _crested lark_. The explanation of this title is given
somewhat lower down.

[64] _Puteoli_ is the Latin name.

[65] Iliad, xi. 682.

[66] Iliad, xi. 244.




BOOK V.--ELIS.




CHAPTER I.


Those Greeks, who say that the Peloponnese is divided into five
parts and no more, are obliged to admit that the people of Elis as
well as the Arcadians dwell in the division of the Arcadians, and
that the second division is Achaia, and that the Dorians have the
remaining three. The indigenous races that inhabit the Peloponnese are
Arcadians and Achæans. And the Achæans were driven out of their own
land by the Dorians, but did not however evacuate the Peloponnese, but
dispossessed the Ionians that lived in what was then called Ægialus,
but is now called after them Achaia. The Arcadians on the other hand
have always up to this day remained in Arcadia. But the other parts
of the Peloponnese are peopled by strangers. The latest importation
were the present Corinthians, who were introduced into the Peloponnese
some 217 years ago by the Roman Emperor. And the Dryopes came into the
Peloponnese from Mount Parnassus, the Dorians from Mount Œta.

  We know that the people of Elis originally came from Calydon and
other parts of Ætolia. And the oldest information I have found about
them is as follows. The first king in this land was they say Aethlius,
the son of Zeus by Protogenea the daughter of Deucalion, and the father
of Endymion. The Moon was they say enamoured of this Endymion, and
had by him 50 daughters. But a more probable account is that Endymion
married Asterodia, others say Chromia the daughter of Itonus the son of
Amphictyon, others say Hyperippe the daughter of Arcas, and had three
sons, Pæon and Epeus and Ætolus, and one daughter Eurycyde. Endymion
also made his sons contend in running at Olympia for the kingdom, and
Epeus won, so the people over whom he ruled were first called Epeans.
And of his brothers Ætolus they say remained at home, but Pæon vexed
at his loss went as far away as possible, and the region beyond the
river Axius was called Pæonia after him. As to the death of Endymion
different accounts are given by the Heracleotæ at Miletus and by the
people of Elis, but the latter show the sepulchre of Endymion, while
the former say that he retired to Mount Latmus, where is his shrine.
And Epeus married Anaxiroe, the daughter of Coronus, by whom he had a
daughter Hyrmina, but no male offspring. And these were the events of
his reign. Œnomaus the son of Alxion, (or the son of Ares, as poets
have sung, which is the prevalent tradition), being ruler of the
country called Pisæa, was deposed from his rule by Pelops the Lydian,
who had crossed over from Asia Minor. And after his death Pelops
occupied Pisæa and Olympia, slicing off from the territory of Epeus
what bordered upon Pisæa. And Pelops (so the people of Elis say) was
the first in the Peloponnese to build a temple to Hermes and sacrifice
to him, thus turning away the wrath of the god for the murder of
Myrtilus.

  And Ætolus, the king after Epeus, had to flee from the Peloponnese,
because the sons of Apis indicted him for the involuntary murder of
their father. For Apis the son of Jason, a native of Pallantium in
Arcadia, was killed by Ætolus’ driving over him in his chariot at the
funeral games in memory of Azan. So Ætolus the son of Endymion fled to
the mainland, to the neighbourhood of the river Achelous, which was
called Ætolia after him. And the kingdom of the Epeans was reigned over
by Eleus, the son of Eurycyde, the daughter of Endymion and (if we may
believe the tradition) Poseidon. And the people in his dominions now
changed their names from Epeans to Eleans.

  And Eleus had a son called Augeas. And those who want to exalt him
change his father’s name, and say that he was the son of Helius (_the
Sun-god_). The oxen and goats of this Augeas were so numerous that
most of the country could not be cultivated for their dung. Hercules
therefore, whether for a part of Elis or some other reward, was
persuaded by him to clear the country of this dung. And he effected
this by turning the river Menius on to it. But Augeas, because the
work had been effected by ingenuity rather than toil, refused to give
Hercules his reward, and turned out of doors the eldest of his sons
Phyleus, because he told him he was not acting with justice to a
benefactor. He also made several preparations to defend himself against
Hercules, should he come into Elis with an army, and entered into an
alliance with Amarynceus and the sons of Actor. Now Amarynceus had an
especial acquaintance with military matters, and his father Pyttius
was a Thessalian by extraction, and had come from thence to Elis. And
to Amarynceus Augeas gave a share of his power at Elis; and Actor and
his sons also, who were natives of Elis, shared in the administration
of the kingdom. The father of Actor was Phorbas the son of Lapithus,
and his mother was Hyrmina, the daughter of Epeus, and Actor built and
called after her the town of Hyrmina in Elis.




CHAPTER II.


Now in the campaign against Augeas Hercules had no opportunity to win
laurels, for as the sons of Actor were in their prime for daring and
vigour of youth, the allied forces of Hercules were constantly routed
by them, until the Corinthians announced a truce during the Isthmian
games, and the sons of Actor went to see the games, and Hercules lay
in ambush for them and slew them at Cleonæ. And the perpetrator of the
deed being unknown, Moline the mother of the lads took the greatest
pains to discover their murderer. And when she discovered who it was,
then the people of Elis claimed compensation for the murder from the
Argives, for Hercules dwelt in Argolis at Tiryns. And as the Argives
refused to give up Hercules, they next begged hard of the Corinthians,
that all Argolis should be scratched from the Isthmian games. But
being unsuccessful in this also, they say Moline put a curse upon
the citizens if they went to the Isthmian games. And these curses of
Moline are observed up to this day, and all the athletes at Elis make
a practice of never going to the Isthmian contest. And there are two
different traditions about this. One of them states that Cypselus the
tyrant at Corinth offered a golden statue to Zeus at Olympia, but,
Cypselus dying before his name was inscribed on the votive offering,
the Corinthians asked the people of Elis to allow them to inscribe
publicly the name of Corinth on the votive offering, and the people of
Elis refusing they were angry with them, and forbade them to contend at
the Isthmian games. But how would the Corinthians have been admitted at
the contests at Olympia, if they had excluded the people of Elis from
the Isthmian games? But the other tradition states that Prolaus, a man
of much repute among the people of Elis, and Lysippe his wife had two
sons Philanthus and Lampus, and they went to the Isthmian games, the
one intending to compete in the pancratium among the boys, the other
in wrestling, and before the games came on they were strangled or
killed in some way by their rivals: and that was why Lysippe imposed
her curses on the people of Elis, if they would not of their own accord
cease to attend the Isthmian games. This tradition too is easily shewn
to be a silly one. For Timon a native of Elis had victories in the
pentathlum in all the other Greek contests, and there is an effigy of
him at Olympia, and some elegiac verses which enumerate the various
crowns that he carried off as victor, and the reason why he did not
participate in the Isthmian contest. This is one couplet. “Our hero was
prevented coming to the land of Sisyphus by the strife that arose in
consequence of the sad fate of the sons of Molione.”




CHAPTER III.


Let this suffice on the matter. To resume, Hercules afterwards captured
and sacked Elis, having got together an army of Argives Thebans and
Arcadians: and the people of Elis were assisted by the men of Pylos
in Elis and by the men of Pisa. And the men of Pylos were punished by
Hercules, and he intended marching against Pisa, but was stopped by the
following oracle from Delphi,

    “Dear to the Father is Pisa, Pytho has entrusted it to me.”

This oracle was the salvation of Pisa. And to Phyleus Hercules gave
up Elis and other places, not so much willingly as standing in awe of
Phyleus, to whom he also granted the captives and forgave Augeas. And
the women of Elis, as their land was stripped of young men through
the war, are said to have prayed to Athene that they might conceive
directly they married, and their prayer was granted, and they erected
a temple to Athene under the title of Mother. And both the women and
men being excessively delighted with their union called the place where
they first met Bady (_sweet_), and also gave the same name in their
national dialect to the river flowing there.

  And when Phyleus, after setting things in order in Elis, returned to
Dulichium, Augeas died being already advanced in age, and was succeeded
in the kingdom of Elis by his son Agasthenes, and by Amphimachus, and
Thalpius. For the sons of Actor married two sisters, the daughters
of Dexamenus who was king at Olenus, and the one had by Theronice
Amphimachus, and the other Eurytus had by Theræphone Thalpius. Not that
Amarynceus or Diores his son remained all their lives in a private
capacity. As we know from Homer in his catalogue of the men of Elis,
all their fleet was 40 sail, and half of them were under Amphimachus
and Thalpius, and of the remaining half ten were under Diores the son
of Amarynceus, and ten under Polyxenus the son of Agasthenes. And
Polyxenus coming back safe from Troy had a son Amphimachus, (he gave
his son this name I fancy from his friendship to Amphimachus the son
of Cteatus who perished at Ilium), and he had a son Eleus, and it was
when Eleus was king at Elis that the Dorian host mustered under the
sons of Aristomachus with a view to return to the Peloponnese. This
oracle came to the kings, that they must make a man with three eyes
leader of the return. And as they were in great doubt what the oracle
could mean, a muleteer chanced to pass by, whose mule was blind of one
eye. And Cresphontes conjecturing that the oracle referred to this
man, the Dorians invited him to be their leader. And he urged them to
return to the Peloponnese in ships, and not force their way through the
isthmus with a land force. This was his advice, and at the same time he
piloted the fleet from Naupactus to Molycrium, and they in return for
his services agreed to give him at his request the kingdom of Elis. And
the man’s name was Oxylus, he was the son of Hæmon, the son of Thoas,
who in conjunction with the sons of Atreus had overturned the kingdom
of Priam; and between Thoas and Ætolus the son of Endymion there are
six generations. And the Heraclidæ were in other respects kinsmen to
the kings in Ætolia, besides the fact that the sisters of Thoas were
mothers by Hercules of Andræmon and Hyllus. And Oxylus had to flee from
Ætolia in consequence of an accident, in throwing a quoit (they say)
he missed his aim and unintentionally killed his brother Thermius, or
according to some accounts Alcidocus the son of Scopius.




CHAPTER IV.


There is also another tradition about Oxylus, that he suspected the
sons of Aristomachus of an unwillingness to give him the kingdom of
Elis, as it was fertile and well cultivated everywhere, and this was
why he led the Dorians through Arcadia and not through Elis. And when
Oxylus hastened to take the kingdom of Elis without contention Dius
would not permit him, but challenged him not to a contention with all
their forces, but to a single combat between two soldiers one from each
side. And both agreed to this. And the men selected for this single
combat were Degmenus a bowman of Elis, and Pyræchmes on the Ætolian
side a famous slinger. And as Pyræchmes was victorious Oxylus got
the kingdom, and he allowed the ancient Epeans to remain there, but
introduced Ætolians as colonists with them, and gave them also a share
in the land. And to Dius he gave various honours, and observed the
rights of all the heroes according to old precedents, and introduced
sacrificial offerings to Augeas which have continued to our day. It
is said that he also persuaded the men in the villages, who were at
no great distance from the walls, to come into the city, and thus
increased the population of Elis and made it more powerful in other
respects. And an oracle came to him from Delphi to associate with him
as colonist a descendant of Pelops, and he made diligent search, and
discovered Agorius the son of Damasius, the son of Penthilus, the son
of Orestes, and invited him from Helice in Achaia and with him a few
Achæans. And they say Oxylus had a wife called Pieria, but they record
nothing further about her. And the sons of Oxylus were they say Ætolus
and Laias. And Ætolus dying in his father’s lifetime, his parents
buried him and erected a sepulchre to him by the gate, which leads to
Olympia and the temple of Zeus. And they buried him there in accordance
with the oracle, which said that his dead body was to be neither in nor
out of the city. And annually still the master of the gymnasium offers
victims to Ætolus.

  Oxylus was succeeded in the kingdom by his son Laias. I could not
find that his sons reigned, so I purposely pass them over, for it has
not been my desire in this narrative to descend to private personages.
But some time afterwards Iphitus, who was of the same family as Oxylus,
and a contemporary of Lycurgus the Lacedæmonian legislator, revived
the contest at Olympia, and renewed the public gathering there, and
established a truce as long as the games lasted. Why the meetings at
Olympia had been discontinued I shall narrate when I come to Olympia.
And as Greece at this time was nearly ruined by civil wars and by
the pestilence, Iphitus bethought him to ask of the god at Delphi a
remission from these ills. And they say he was ordered by the Pythian
Priestess to join the people of Elis in restoring the Olympian games.
Iphitus also persuaded the people of Elis to sacrifice to Hercules, for
before this they had an idea that Hercules was hostile to them. And the
inscription at Olympia says that Iphitus was the son of Hæmon, but most
of the Greeks say he was the son of Praxonides and not of Hæmon. But
the ancient records of the people of Elis trace him up to a father of
the same name as himself _viz._ Iphitus.

  The people of Elis took part in the Trojan war, and also in the
battles against the Persians when they invaded Greece. And to pass over
their frequent disputes with the people of Pisa and the Arcadians in
respect to the re-establishment of the games at Olympia, they joined
the Lacedæmonians not without reluctance in invading Attica, and not
long after they fought against the Lacedæmonians, having formed an
alliance with the Mantineans the Argives and the Athenians. And on the
occasion of Agis making an incursion into Elis, when Xenias played the
traitor, the people of Elis were victorious at Olympia, and routed
the Lacedæmonians, and drove them from the precincts of the temple:
and some time afterwards the war came to an end on the conditions
which I have mentioned before in my account of the Lacedæmonians.
And when Philip, the son of Amyntas, could not keep his hands off
Greece, the people of Elis, worn out with intestine factions, joined
the Macedonians, but not to the point of fighting against the Greeks
at Chæronea. But they participated in the attack of Philip upon the
Lacedæmonians by reason of their ancient hatred to them. But after the
death of Alexander they joined the Greeks in fighting against Antipater
and the Macedonians.




CHAPTER V.


And in process of time Aristotimus, the son of Damaretus, the son of
Etymon, obtained the sovereignty at Elis, partly through the assistance
of Antigonus the son of Demetrius, who was king of the Macedonians. But
when he had reigned only six months, Chilon and Hellanicus and Lampis
and Cylon rose up against him and deposed him; and Cylon slew him with
his own hand when he had fled as suppliant to the altar of Zeus Soter.
These are the chief wars the people of Elis took part in, just to
glance at them briefly in the present portion of my work.

  Among the wonders of Elis are the flax, which grows here alone and
in no other part of Greece, and also the fact that, though over the
borders mares bear foals to he-asses, it is never so in Elis. And this
phenomenon is they say the result of a curse. The flax in Elis in
respect of thinness is not inferior to the flax of the Hebrews, but is
not as yellow.

  And as you go from the district of Elis there is a place by the sea
called Samicum, and beyond it on the right is the district called
Triphylia, and the city Lepreus in it. The people of Lepreus think they
belong properly to Arcadia, but it is manifest they were from time
immemorial subject to Elis. For the victors at Olympia that came from
Lepreus were pronounced by the herald men of Elis. And Aristophanes has
described Lepreus as a city in Elis. One way to Lepreus from Samicum is
by leaving the river Aniger on the left, and a second is from Olympia,
and a third from Elis, and the longest of them is only a day’s journey.
The city got its name they say from Lepreus the son of Pyrgeus its
founder. There is a tradition that Lepreus had an eating contest with
Hercules, each killed an ox at the same time and cooked it for dinner,
and (as he had betted) he was quite a match for Hercules in eating.
But he had the hardihood afterwards to challenge Hercules to a contest
in arms. And they say he was killed in that contest and buried at
Phigalia, however his sepulchre there is not shewn. And I have heard
some who claim that their city was founded by Leprea the daughter
of Pyrgeus. Others say that the inhabitants of this region were the
first lepers, and that the city got its name from this misfortune of
its inhabitants. And the people of Lepreus say that in their city
they once had a temple of Leucæan Zeus, and the tomb of Lycurgus the
son of Aleus, and also the tomb of Caucon. The last had they say as a
design over it a man with a lyre. But in my time there is no remarkable
tomb there, nor any temple of the gods except one of Demeter: built
of unbaked brick, and containing no statue. And not far from the
city Lepreus is a spring called Arene: it got this name according to
tradition from the wife of Aphareus.

  And as you return to Samicum, and go through it, the river Aniger
has its outlet to the sea. The flow of this river is often impeded by
violent winds: for they blow the sand from the shore into it and dam
up the flow of the river. Whenever then this sand becomes soaked with
water, (outside by the sea inside by the river), it becomes a very
dangerous place for carts and carriages and even for an active man to
ford. This river Aniger rises in the Arcadian mountain Lapithus, and
the water has an unpleasant smell from its source. Before receiving
its tributary the Acidas it is too fetid to have any fish whatever,
and after its confluence with the Acidas, though it has fish that
come into its waters from that tributary, they are no longer eatable,
which they are when caught in the Acidas. That the ancient name of the
river Acidas was Iardanus I should not myself have conjectured, but
I was so informed by an Ephesian. The unpleasant smell of the Aniger
comes I believe from the soil through which the river flows, as is
certainly the case with those rivers beyond Ionia, whose exhalations
are deadly to man. Some of the Greeks say that Chiron, others that
Pylenor the Centaur, was wounded by Hercules, and fled and washed his
sore in this river, and that it was from the Hydra’s poison (_in which
Hercules’ arrow had been dipped_) that the Aniger got its unpleasant
smell. Others refer this condition of the river to Melampus the son of
Amythaon, and to the fact that the purifications of the daughters of
Prœtus were thrown into it.

  There is at Samicum a cave, not far from the river, called the cave
of the Nymphs of the Aniger. Whoever goes into it suffering from either
black or white leprosy, must first of all pray to these Nymphs and
promise sacrifice to them, and afterwards wipe clean the diseased parts
of his body. If he next swims across the river he leaves in the water
his foul disease, and comes out of the river sound and with his skin
uniformly clear.




CHAPTER VI.


On the high road, after crossing the Aniger in the direction of
Olympia, there is at no great distance on the right an eminence,
and on it a town called Samia above Samicum. This town[67] they say
was made into a sort of offensive fortress against the Arcadians by
Polysperchon, an Ætolian.

  As to the ruins of Arene, none either of the Messenians or people of
Elis could give me a clear account. As their explanations are different
those who like to conjecture are at liberty to do so. The most
credible account seems to me that of those who think that the ancient
name of Samicum earlier than the time of the heroes was Arene. And
these quote the lines in the Iliad.

    “There is a river Minyeïus,
    That flows into the sea near to Arene.”
                                  Iliad, xi 722, 723.

And these ruins of Arene are very near the Aniger. One might have
doubted about Samicum having been called Arene, only the Arcadians
admit that the ancient name of the river Aniger was Minyeïus. And one
would feel sure that the river Neda near the sea was the boundary
between Elis and Messenia at the time of the return of the Heraclidæ to
the Peloponnese.

  And leaving the Aniger, and passing through a district generally
sandy and full of wild pine-trees, somewhat back to the left you will
see the ruins of Scillus. Scillus was one of the towns of Triphylia:
and in the war between the people of Elis and Pisa the people of
Scillus openly allied themselves to the people of Pisa, and in return
the men of Elis dispossessed them from Scillus. But the Lacedæmonians
afterwards sliced Scillus from Elis, and gave it to Xenophon (the son
of Gryllus), who was at that time exiled from Athens. He was banished
by the Athenians for joining Cyrus (who hated their democracy) against
the king of the Persians (who was their friend): for when Cyrus was at
Sardis he gave Lysander, the son of Aristocritus, and the Lacedæmonians
some money for their fleet. This is why Xenophon was banished, and he
lived at Scillus and built a temple and grove to Ephesian Artemis. And
Scillus affords good hunting of wild animals, as wild boars and deer.
And the river Selinus flows through the district. And the antiquarians
of Elis say that the people of Elis recovered Scillus, and that
Xenophon was tried in the Olympian council for receiving Scillus from
the Lacedæmonians, but was acquitted and allowed to continue there scot
free. And at some little distance from the temple they show a tomb, and
there is an effigy on the tomb in Pentelican marble, which the people
of the place say is Xenophon.

  On the road to Olympia from Scillus, before crossing the Alpheus,
is a mountain lofty and precipitous which is called Typæum. From this
mountain it is the custom to hurl all women of Elis who are detected as
competitors in the Olympian contests, or who merely cross the Alpheus
on forbidden days. Not that any one ever yet was so detected except
Callipatira, whose name according to some traditions was Pherenice. She
after the death of her husband dressed herself up like an athlete, and
brought her son as a combatant to Olympia. And Pisirodus her son having
been victorious, Callipatira in leaping over the fence which parted
the athletes from the spectators, exposed her person, and though her
sex was detected they let her go without punishment out of respect to
her father and brothers and son, who had all been victors at Olympia,
but they passed a law that henceforth all athletes should come to the
contests naked.




CHAPTER VII.


And when you have got to Olympia immediately you see the river Alpheus,
a full and very pleasant river, and no less than seven notable rivers
are tributaries to it. For through Megalopolis the Helisson flows
into it, and the Brentheates from the district of Megalopolis, and
the Gortynius near Gortyna where is a temple of Æsculapius, and from
Melæneæ between the districts of Megalopolis and Heræa the Buphagus,
and the Ladon from the district of the Clitorians, and the river
Erymanthus from the mountain of the same name. All these flow into the
Alpheus from Arcadia, and the Cladeus from Elis also contributes its
stream. And the source of the Alpheus is in Arcadia and not in Elis.
And there are several traditions about the Alpheus, as that he was a
hunter and enamoured of Arethusa, and that she hunted with him. And as
Arethusa was unwilling to marry him, she crossed over they say to an
island near Syracuse, called Ortygia, and there became a spring: just
as Alpheus in consequence of his love was changed into a river. This
is the tradition about the Alpheus and the Ortygia. As to the river
going under the sea and coming up in another place, there is no reason
why I should discredit that, as I know that the god at Delphi admitted
it, seeing that when he sent Archias the Corinthian to establish a
colony at Syracuse, these were some of the words he used, “Ortygia
lies in the cloudy sea above Trinacria, where the mouth of the Alpheus
mixes and flows with the springs of the broad Arethusa.” From this
circumstance of their union, and not any love passages, I imagine the
traditions about the two rivers originated. And all the Greeks or
Egyptians, that have penetrated into Ethiopia beyond Syene, and as far
as the Ethiopian city of Meroe, say that the Nile enters into a marsh,
and flows through it as if it were earth, and eventually through lower
Ethiopia into Egypt to Pharos, where it has its outlet at the sea. And
in the land of the Hebrews I know that the river Jordan flows through
the lake of Tiberias, and into what is called the Dead Sea, by which
it is absorbed. The Dead Sea has properties unlike any other water:
living bodies can float in it without swimming, whereas dead bodies go
to the bottom. And it has no fish, for from their evident danger they
take refuge in water more congenial to them. And there is a river in
Ionia similar to the Alpheus, its source is in the mountain Mycale, and
it flows under the sea, and comes up again at Branchidæ at the harbour
called Panormus. All this is correctly stated.

  In regard to the Olympian Games those who are in possession of the
most ancient archives of the people of Elis say that Cronos was the
first king of Heaven, and that he had a temple built to him at Olympia
by the mortals who then lived, who were called the golden age: and
that, when Zeus was born, Rhea entrusted the charge of the boy to the
Idæan Dactyli, who were otherwise called the Curetes: who afterwards
came to Elis from Ida in Crete, and their names were Hercules, and
Epimedes, and Pæonæus, and Iasius, and Idas. And Hercules the eldest
of them challenged his brothers in play to run a race together, and
they would crown the victor with a branch of the wild olive: and there
was such abundance of wild olive trees that they strewed under them
the leaves while they were still green as beds to sleep on. And they
say that the wild olive was introduced to the Greeks by Hercules from
the country of the Hyperboreans, who dwelt north of the wind Boreas.
Olen the Lycian first mentioned in a hymn to Achæia, that she came to
Delos from these Hyperboreans, and when Melanopus of Cumæ composed an
ode to Opis and Hecaerges, he mentioned that they too came from the
Hyperboreans to Delos before Achæia. And Aristæus of Proconnesus, who
has also mentioned the Hyperboreans, may perhaps have heard more of
them from the Issedones, to whom in his poems he says they went. At
any rate to Idæan Hercules belongs the glory that he first instituted
and gave their name to the Olympian contests. He appointed them to be
held every fifth year because he and his brothers were five in number.
And some say that it was there that Zeus contended with Cronos about
the sovereignty of Heaven, others say he appointed these games after
his success over Cronos. Other gods are said to have been victorious,
as Apollo who outran Hermes, who challenged him to the contest,
and outboxed Ares. And this is the reason they say why the Pythian
flute-playing was introduced in the leaping contest at the pentathlum,
because the flute was sacred to Apollo, and Apollo was on several
occasions the victor at Olympia.




CHAPTER VIII.


And after this they say Clymenus the son of Cardys, (in the 50th year
after Deucalion’s flood), a descendant of Idæan Hercules, came from
Crete and established games at Olympia, and erected an altar to his
ancestor Hercules and to the other Curetes, giving Hercules the title
of Assistant. But Endymion the son of Aethlius deposed Clymenus from
the kingdom, and gave it to his sons as a prize for the best runner
of them at Olympia. And a generation after Endymion, Pelops made the
contest to Olympian Zeus more famous than any of his predecessors.
And when the sons of Pelops were scattered from Elis all over the
Peloponnese, Amythaon the son of Cretheus, uncle of Endymion on the
father’s side, (for they say Aethlius was the son of Æolus surnamed
Zeus), appointed games at Olympia, and after him Pelias and Neleus in
common. So also did Augeas and Hercules, the son of Amphitryon, after
the capture of Elis. And all that he crowned as victors were Iolaus,
who had borrowed the mares of Hercules for the race. It was an old
custom to be a competitor with borrowed horses. Homer at least in the
funeral games in honour of Patroclus has represented Menelaus as yoking
together Agamemnon’s horse Æthe with one of his own.[68] Iolaus was
also Hercules’ charioteer. He was the victor in the chariot race, and
Iasius an Arcadian in the riding race, and Castor was successful in
running, Pollux in boxing. It is also recorded of Hercules that he was
victorious in wrestling and in the pancratium.

  And after the reign of Oxylus, who also established games, the
Olympian games were suspended till Iphitus. And when he renewed the
games as I have before stated, there was a general forgetfulness about
the ancient games, but in a short while they got remembered again,
and whenever they remembered any little feature of the games, they
added it to the programme. And this proves my statement. From the
time that the Olympian games were revived continuously, prizes were
first instituted for running, and Corœbus of Elis was the victor. His
statue is at Olympia, and his grave is on the borders of Elis. And
in the 14th Olympiad afterwards the double course was introduced:
when Hypenus a native of Pisa won the wild olive crown, and Acanthus
was second. And in the 18th Olympiad they remembered the pentathlum
and the wrestling, in the former Lampis was victor, in the latter
Eurybatus, both Lacedæmonians. And in the 23rd Olympiad they ordained
prizes for boxing, and Onomastus was victor from Smyrna (which was at
that day reckoned as Ionia). And in the 25th Olympiad they had a race
of full-grown horses, and the Theban Pagondas was proclaimed victor
in this race. And in the eighth Olympiad later they introduced the
pancratium and the riding race. The horse of Crannonian Crauxidas
got in first, and the competitors for the pancratium were beaten by
the Syracusan Lygdamis, who has his sepulchre at the stonequarries
of Syracuse. And I don’t know whether Lygdamis was really as big
as the Theban Hercules, but that is the tradition at Syracuse. And
the contest of the boys was not a revival of ancient usage, but the
people of Elis instituted it because the idea pleased them. So prizes
were instituted for running and wrestling among boys in the 307th
Olympiad, and Hipposthenes the Lacedæmonian won the wrestling prize,
and Polynices from Elis the running prize. And in the 41st Olympiad
afterwards they invited boxing boys, and the one who won the prize
from all the competitors was Philetas from Sybaris. And the race in
heavy armour was tried in the 65th Olympiad, as an exercise for war I
think: and of those who ran with their shields Damaretus of Heræum was
the victor. And the race of two full-grown horses called a pair was
established in the 93rd Olympiad, and Evagoras of Elis was the victor.
And in the 99th Olympiad they had a fancy to contend with chariots
drawn by colts, and the Lacedæmonian Sybariades had the prize for this
contest. And they afterwards established races of a pair of colts and
for riding a colt, and the victor in the former was Belistiche, a woman
who lived in Macedonia near the sea, and in the latter Tlepolemus the
Lycian in the 131st Olympiad, Belistiche’s victory was in the 3rd
Olympiad before. And in the 145th Olympiad prizes were instituted for a
pancratium-contest for boys, and Phædimus an Æolian from the Troad was
victor.




CHAPTER IX.


And some of the contests at Olympia were put an end to, the people
of Elis having resolved to discontinue them. For the pentathlum for
boys was established in the 38th Olympiad, but when the Lacedæmonian
Eutelidas had won the crown of wild olive, the people of Elis did not
care that their lads should train for the pentathlum. So it dropped.
And the chariot race and the trotting race, the former established
in the 70th Olympiad and the latter in the 71st Olympiad, were both
stopped by proclamation in the 84th Olympiad. When they were first
instituted Thersius the Thessalian won the prize in the former, and
Patæcus an Achæan from Dyme in the latter. In the trotting race the
riders used to jump off towards the end of the course and run with
the horses still holding the reins, as what are called professional
riders do to this day, only the latter employ stallions and have their
own colours. But the chariot race is not an ancient invention nor a
graceful exhibition, and the people of Elis (who have always disliked
the horse) yoke two mules together instead of horses.

  The order of the games in our day is to sacrifice victims to the god,
and then to contend in the pentathlum and horse-race, according to the
programme established in the 77th Olympiad, for before this horses and
men contended on the same day. And at that period the pancratiasts did
not appear till night for they could not compete sooner, so much time
being taken up by the horse-races and pentathlum. And the Athenian
Callias was the victor of the pancratiasts. But for the future they
took care that neither the pentathlum nor horse-races should stand in
the way of the pancratium. And as regards the umpires of the games, the
original rules and those in vogue in our day are quite different, for
Iphitus was the only umpire, and after Iphitus the posterity of Oxylus,
but in the 50th Olympiad two men picked by lot out of all Elis were
entrusted with the stewardship of the contests, and this practice of
two umpires continued for a very long time. But in the 25th Olympiad
afterwards 9 general Umpires were appointed: three for the horse-race,
three to watch the pentathlum, and three to preside over the remaining
games. And in the 2nd Olympiad after this a tenth Umpire was appointed.
And in the 103rd Olympiad, as the people of Elis had 12 tribes, a
general Umpire was appointed by each. And when they were hard pressed
by the Arcadians in war, they lost a portion of their territory and all
the villages in this portion, and so they were only 8 tribes in number
in the 104th Olympiad, and had only 8 general Umpires accordingly.
And in the 108th Olympiad they returned to the number of 10 general
Umpires, and that has continued the number to our day.




CHAPTER X.


Many various wonders may one see, or hear of, in Greece: but the
Eleusinian mysteries and Olympian games seem to exhibit more than
anything else the divine purpose. And the sacred grove of Zeus they
have from old time called Altis, slightly changing the Greek word for
grove[69]: it is indeed called Altis also by Pindar, in the Ode he
composed for a victor at Olympia. And the temple and statue of Zeus
were built out of the spoils of Pisa, which the people of Elis razed
to the ground, after quelling the revolt of Pisa and some of the
neighbouring towns that revolted with Pisa. And that the statue of Zeus
was the work of Phidias is shown by the inscription written at the base
of it,

  “Phidias the Athenian, the son of Charmides, made me.”

  The temple is a Doric building, and outside it is a colonnade. And
the temple is built of stone of the district. Its height up to the
gable is 68 feet, its breadth 95 feet, and its length 230 feet. And its
architect was Libon a native of Elis. And the tiles on the roof are
not of baked earth, but Pentelican marble to imitate tiles. They say
such roofs are the invention of a man of Naxos called Byzes, who made
statues at Naxos with the inscription,

  “Euergus of Naxos made me, the son of Byzes, and descended from Leto,
the first who made tiles of stone.”

  This Byzes was a contemporary of Alyattes the Lydian and Astyages
(the son of Cyaxaras) the king of Persia. And there is a golden vase at
each end of the roof, and a golden Victory in the middle of the gable.
And underneath the Victory is a golden shield hung up as a votive
offering, with the Gorgon Medusa worked on it. The inscription on the
shield states who hung it up, and the reason why they did so. For this
is what it says.

  “This temple’s golden shield is a votive offering from the
Lacedæmonians at Tanagra and their allies, a gift from the Argives the
Athenians and the Ionians, a tithe offering for success in war.”

  The battle I mentioned in my account of Attica, when I described the
tombs at Athens. And in the same temple at Olympia, above the zone
that runs round the pillars on the outside, are 21 golden shields, the
offering of Mummius the Roman General, after he had beaten the Achæans
and taken Corinth, and expelled the Dorians from Corinth. And on the
gables in bas relief is the chariot race between Pelops and Œnomaus,
and both chariots in motion. And in the middle of the gable is a statue
of Zeus, and on the right hand of Zeus is Œnomaus with a helmet on his
head, and beside him his wife Sterope, one of the daughters of Atlas.
And Myrtilus, who was the charioteer of Œnomaus, is seated behind the
four horses. And next to him are two men whose names are not recorded,
but they are doubtless Œnomaus’ grooms, whose duty was to take care of
the horses. And at the end of the gable is a delineation of the river
Cladeus, next to the Alpheus held most in honour of all the rivers of
Elis. And on the left of the statue of Zeus are Pelops and Hippodamia
and the charioteer of Pelops and the horses, and two men who were
Pelops’ grooms. And where the gable tapers fine there is the Alpheus
delineated. And Pelop’s charioteer was according to the tradition of
the Trœzenians Sphærus, but the custodian at Olympia said that his name
was Cilla. The carvings on the gables in front are by Pæonius of Mende
in Thracia, those behind by Alcamenes, a contemporary of Phidias and
second only to him as statuary. And on the gables is a representation
of the fight between the Lapithæ and the Centaurs at the marriage
of Pirithous. Pirithous is in the centre, and on one side of him is
Eurytion trying to carry off Pirithous’ wife and Cæneus coming to the
rescue, and on the other side Theseus laying about among the Centaurs
with his battle-axe: and one Centaur is carrying off a maiden, another
a blooming boy. Alcamenes has engraved this story, I imagine, because
he learnt from the lines of Homer that Pirithous was the son of Zeus,
and knew that Theseus was fourth in descent from Pelops. There are
also in bas relief at Olympia most of the Labours of Hercules. Above
the doors of the temple is the hunting of the Erymanthian boar, and
Hercules taking the mares of Diomede the Thracian, and robbing the oxen
of Geryon in the island of Erythea, and supporting the load of Atlas,
and clearing the land of Elis of its dung. And above the chamber behind
the doors he is robbing the Amazon of her belt, and there is the stag,
and the Cretan Minotaur, and the Stymphalian birds, and the hydra, and
the Nemean lion. And as you enter the brazen doors on the right in
front of the pillar is Iphitus being crowned by his wife Ecechiria,
as the inscription in verse states. And there are pillars inside the
temple, and porticoes above, and an approach by them to the image of
Zeus. There is also a winding staircase to the roof.




CHAPTER XI.


The image of the god is in gold and ivory, seated on a throne. And a
crown is on his head imitating the foliage of the olive tree. In his
right hand he holds a Victory in ivory and gold, with a tiara and crown
on his head: and in his left hand a sceptre adorned with all manner of
precious stones, and the bird seated on the sceptre is an eagle. The
robes and sandals of the god are also of gold: and on his robes are
imitations of flowers, especially of lilies. And the throne is richly
adorned with gold and precious stones, and with ebony and ivory. And
there are imitations of animals painted on it, and models worked on it.
There are four Victories like dancers one at each foot of the throne,
and two also at the instep of each foot: and at each of the front feet
are Theban boys carried off by Sphinxes, and below the Sphinxes Apollo
and Artemis shooting down the children of Niobe. And between the feet
of the throne are four divisions formed by straight lines drawn from
each of the four feet. In the division nearest the entrance there are
seven models, the eighth has vanished no one knows where or how. And
they are imitations of ancient contests, for in the days of Phidias the
contests for boys were not yet established. And the figure with its
head muffled up in a scarf is they say Pantarces, who was a native
of Elis and the darling of Phidias. This Pantarces won the wrestling
prize for boys in the 86th Olympiad. And in the remaining divisions is
the band of Hercules fighting against the Amazons. The number on each
side is 29, and Theseus is on the side of Hercules. And the throne is
supported not only by the four feet, but also by 4 pillars between
the feet. But one cannot get under the throne, as one can at Amyclæ,
and pass inside, for at Olympia there are panels like walls that keep
one off. Of these panels the one opposite the doors of the temple is
painted sky blue only, but the others contain paintings by Panænus.
Among them is Atlas bearing up Earth and Heaven, and Hercules standing
by willing to relieve him of his load, and Theseus and Pirithous, and
Greece, and Salamis with the figurehead of a ship in her hand, and
the contest of Hercules with the Nemean lion, and Ajax’s unknightly
violation of Cassandra, and Hippodamia the daughter of Œnomaus with her
mother, and Prometheus still chained to the rock and Hercules gazing
at him. For the tradition is that Hercules slew the eagle that was
ever tormenting Prometheus on Mount Caucasus, and released Prometheus
from his chains. The last paintings are Penthesilea dying and Achilles
supporting her, and two Hesperides carrying the apples of which they
are fabled to have been the keepers. This Panænus was the brother of
Phidias, and at Athens in the Painted Stoa he has painted the action
at Marathon. At the top of the throne Phidias has represented above
the head of Zeus the three Graces and three Seasons. For these too, as
we learn from the poets, were daughters of Zeus. Homer in the Iliad
has represented the Seasons as having the care of Heaven, as a kind
of guards of a royal palace.[70] And the base under the feet of Zeus,
(what is called in Attic θρανίον), has golden lions engraved on it, and
the battle between Theseus and the Amazons, the first famous exploit
of the Athenians beyond their own borders. And on the platform that
supports the throne there are various ornaments round Zeus and gilt
carving, the Sun seated in his chariot, and Zeus and Hera, and near
is Grace. Hermes is close to her, and Vesta close to Hermes. And
next to Vesta is Eros receiving Aphrodite just rising from the sea,
who is being crowned by Persuasion. And Apollo and Artemis Athene and
Hercules are standing by, and at the end of the platform Amphitrite and
Poseidon, and Selene apparently urging on her horse. And some say it is
a mule and not a horse that the goddess is riding upon, and there is a
silly tale about this mule.

  I know that the size of the Olympian Zeus both in height and breadth
has been stated, but I cannot bestow praise on the measurers, for their
recorded measurement comes far short of what anyone would infer looking
at the statue. They make the god also to have testified to the art of
Phidias. For they say when the statue was finished, Phidias prayed him
to signify if the work was to his mind, and immediately Zeus struck
with lightning that part of the pavement, where in our day there is a
brazen urn with a lid.

  And all the pavement in front of the statue is not of white but
of black stone. And a border of Parian marble runs round this black
stone, as a preservative against spilled oil. For oil is good for
the statue at Olympia, as it prevents the ivory being harmed by the
dampness of the grove. But in the Acropolis at Athens, in regard to
the statue of Athene called the Maiden, it is not oil but water that
is advantageously employed to the ivory: for as the citadel is dry by
reason of its great height, the statue being made of ivory needs to be
sprinkled with water freely. And when I was at Epidaurus, and enquired
why they use neither water nor oil to the statue of Æsculapius, the
sacristans of the temple informed me that the statue of the god and its
throne are over a well.




CHAPTER XII.


Those who think that the parts of the elephant that project from the
mouth are teeth and not horns, should consider the case of Celtic elks
and Ethiopian bulls. For male elks have horns on their foreheads,
but the female elk has none whatever. And Ethiopian bulls have horns
growing in their nostrils. Who would therefore think it very wonderful
after these examples that a beast should have horns growing out of its
mouth? One may also get further light from the following particulars.
Horns in animals take a certain definite period to grow and grow more
than once: and this is the case with stags and antelopes as well as
elephants. But no animal after full growth has second sets of teeth.
If they are teeth therefore and not horns that project from elephants’
mouths, how could they grow a second time? Moreover teeth are not acted
upon by fire, but horns both of oxen and elephants can by the action of
fire be made straight from round, and can in fact be turned into any
shape. [But in hippopotamuses and boars the lower jaw has projecting
teeth: and we do not see horns growing out of their jaws.] Let anybody
be certain therefore that they are horns in the elephant that project
and grow out from the temples. I don’t make this assertion as mere
hearsay, for I have seen the skull of an elephant in the temple of
Artemis in Campania. The temple I refer to is about 30 stades from
Capua, which is the chief town of Campania. And the elephant is not
only different from other animals in the growth of its horns, but also
in its size and appearance. And the Greeks seem to me to have shewn
great munificence and an absence of parsimoniousness in respect to
their worship of the gods, seeing that they procured ivory both from
India and Ethiopia for their statues.

  At Olympia also in the temple of Zeus is a woollen veil, adorned
with Assyrian tapestry and dyed with the Phœnician purple, the votive
offering of Antiochus, who also gave to the theatre at Athens a golden
ægis with the Gorgon’s head on it. This veil is not drawn up to the
roof as in the temple of Ephesian Artemis, but let down to the
pavement by ropes. And among the votive offerings in the temple or
ante-chapel is the throne of Arimnestus king of the Tyrrhenians, (who
was the first foreigner that offered a votive offering to Olympian
Zeus,) and the horses of Cynisca in brass, the memorials of her victory
at Olympia. These horses are rather smaller than life, and are on the
right as you enter the ante-chapel. And there is a tripod covered with
brass, on which before the table was made the crowns for the victors
were laid. And of the statues of the Emperors, Adrian’s in Parian
marble was a gift of all the cities that joined the Achæan league, and
Trajan’s a gift of all the Greeks. This last Emperor added the Getæ
beyond Thrace to the Roman Empire, and waged war against Osroes (the
descendant of Arsaces) and the Parthians. The most famous of all his
works are the Baths which are known as Trajan’s Baths, and a large
theatre perfectly round, and a building for horse-races two stades in
length, and the forum at Rome well worth seeing for various beauties
and especially its brazen roof. And there are two statues in the round
parts of the building, one of the Emperor Augustus in amber, the other
in ivory is said to be Nicomedes, the king of Bithynia: from whom the
largest town in Bithynia, that had been previously called Astacus, got
called Nicomedia. It was originally founded by Zypœtes, a Thracian
as one would infer from his name. And the amber of which they made
Augustus’ statue, the native amber which is found in the sands of the
Eridanus, is most rare and precious to man for many purposes. But the
other kind of amber is gold mixed with silver. And in the temple at
Olympia there are several of Nero’s votive offerings, 3 are crowns to
imitate the wild olive, the fourth is an imitation of oak. And there
are 25 brazen shields to be worn by the competitors in the race in
armour. And there are several pillars, and among them one which has the
covenant of the people of Elis and the Athenians Argives and Mantineans
for an alliance for 100 years.




CHAPTER XIII.


And within Altis there is a separate grove to Pelops: who of the heroes
at Olympia is as much held in the highest honour as Zeus is among the
gods. This grove is on the right of the temple of Zeus towards the
North, just at such a distance from the temple as to admit of statues
and votive offerings between, and it extends from the middle of the
temple to the back, and is surrounded by a stone wall, and has trees
planted in it, and statues. And the entrance to it is from the west.
And it is said to have been dedicated to Pelops by Hercules the son of
Amphitryon, who was fourth in descent from Pelops. And he is said to
have sacrificed in the trench to Pelops. And the magistrates for the
year sacrifice to him even now a black ram. The seer has no portion
of this sacrifice, the neck of the ram only is usually given to the
person called the wood-cutter. He is one of the temple servants, and
his function is to furnish wood for the sacrifices at a fixed price,
both to cities and to any private individual. And the wood is always
of the white poplar tree. And whatever stranger or native of Elis eats
the flesh of the victim sacrificed to Pelops may not enter the temple
of Zeus. Those who sacrifice to Telephus at Pergamum north of the river
Caicus are in a similar predicament: they may not enter the temple of
Æsculapius till they have had a bath. And the following tradition is
still told about Pelops. During the protracted siege of Ilium the seers
are said to have prophesied that they would never capture the town
till they procured the bows of Hercules and a bone of Pelops. So they
sent it is said for Philoctetes to the camp, and the shoulder-blade of
Pelops was brought from Pisa. And on the return home of the Greeks,
the ship that had the shoulder-blade of Pelops was wrecked near Eubœa.
And many years after the capture of Ilium Damarmenus, a fisherman
of Eretria, cast his net into the sea and fished up this bone, and
marvelling at the size of it hid it in the sand. And eventually he went
to Delphi, desiring to know who the bone belonged to, and what he
should do with it. And it chanced providentially that some persons of
Elis, seeking a cure for the pestilence, were at Delphi at this period.
And the Pythian Priestess told them to preserve the bones of Pelops,
and told Damarmenus to give what he had found to the people of Elis.
And when he had done so the people of Elis gave him several presents,
and made Damarmenus and his descendants custodians of this bone. But
this shoulder-blade of Pelops has not survived to our day, because in
my opinion it was buried too deep, partly also from time and the action
of the sea. And there are still traces even to our day of Pelops and
Tantalus having brought colonies to Greece, as the marsh called after
Tantalus, and his well-known grave. And the throne of Pelops is at
Sipylus on the top of the mountain above the temple of the Placianian
mother, and after you have crossed the river Hermus there is a statue
of Aphrodite at Temnus still in existence made of myrtle: and the
tradition is that it was a votive offering of Pelops to propitiate the
goddess, before begging her help towards marrying Hippodamia.

  And the altar of Olympian Zeus is about equidistant from the grove
of Pelops and the temple of Hera, and is situated in front of both.
Some say it was erected by Idæan Hercules, others say by some heroes
of the district two generations after him. It was they say made of
the _débris_ of the thigh bones of the victims sacrificed to Zeus,
as the altar at Pergamum. The Samian Hera has also an altar made of
similar material, an altar not a whit more handsome than those which
in Attica they call extemporary altars. And the first base of the
altar of Olympia, called the pro-altar, has a circumference of 125
feet, and above the pro-altar is a circumference of 32 feet. And the
whole height of the altar is 22 feet. It is customary to sacrifice the
victims at the lower part, at the pro-altar: but the thigh-bones they
bring to the highest part of the altar and burn them there. And stone
steps lead up to the pro-altar on both sides, but up to the high altar
there are merely steps of _débris_. Maidens may ascend as far as the
pro-altar, and likewise women at the seasons when they are allowed to
be at Olympia, but men alone may ascend to the high altar. And private
individuals, and the people of Elis daily, offer sacrifices to Zeus
besides at the general Festival. And annually the seers observe the
19th day of the month Elaphius by carrying the _débris_ from the Town
Hall, and kneading it with the water of the River Alpheus, and thus
construct their altar. No other water is ever used for this purpose,
and that is why the Alpheus is considered more friendly to Olympian
Zeus than any other river. There is also at Didymi (a town of the
Milesians) an altar made by Hercules the Theban of victims’ blood. So
at least the Milesians say. But the blood of the victims has never
raised it to any great height even in these latter days.




CHAPTER XIV.


But the altar at Olympia has another wonder. Kites, which are by nature
especially birds of prey, never harm the sacrifices at Olympia. And if
on any chance occasion a kite touch the entrails or flesh of a victim,
it is not considered a good omen for the sacrificer. And they say when
Hercules, the son of Alcmena, was sacrificing at Olympia there was a
great plague of flies: when, either of his own idea or at another’s
suggestion, he sacrificed to Zeus the Averter of flies, and so they
were driven to the other side of the Alpheus. On similar grounds the
natives of Elis are said to sacrifice to Zeus the Averter of flies,
because he drove them from Olympia.

  The wood of the white poplar tree is the only wood that the people of
Elis employ in the sacrifices of Zeus, giving that tree this especial
honour, I imagine, because Hercules introduced it from Thesprotia into
Greece. And I think there can be little doubt that Hercules himself,
when he sacrificed to Zeus at Olympia, burnt the thighs of the victims
on white poplar wood. Hercules found this tree growing near the Acheron
a river in Thesprotia, and that is why they say it is called Acherois
by Homer.[71] In all ages rivers have been celebrated for the growth
of various grasses and trees on their banks. Thus the Mæander is most
famous for tamarisks, and the Asopus in Bœotia for immense reeds, and
the Persea is found only on the banks of the Nile. Thus there is no
wonder that by the Acheron first grew the white poplar, and that the
wild olive grows near the Alpheus, and that the black poplar grows on
Celtic soil by the river Eridanus.

  Let us now, as we have made mention of the greatest altar, enumerate
all the altars at Olympia. I will take them in the order the people
of Elis are accustomed to sacrifice at them. They first sacrifice
to Vesta, and next to Olympian Zeus in the altar inside the temple,
thirdly to Hermes, fourthly to Artemis, fifthly to Athene the Goddess
of Booty, sixthly to Athene Ergane. To this Athene the descendants of
Phidias, (called the cleansers because they received from the people of
Elis the honour of cleansing the statue of Zeus from anything clinging
to it), sacrifice before they commence polishing up the statue. And
there is also another altar of Athene near the temple, and near it a
square altar of Artemis tapering up gradually at the top. And next to
those we have mentioned they sacrifice to Alpheus and Artemis at one
altar: the reason for this I learnt from one of Pindar’s Odes, and I
have recorded it in my account of the Letrinæans.[72] And at no great
distance from this is another altar to Alpheus, and near it an altar to
Hephæstus, which some of the people of Elis say is the altar of Martial
Zeus, at which Œnomaus sacrificed when he proposed the horse-race for
the suitors of his daughter Hippodamia. Next is an altar of Hercules
under the title of Aider, and altars to Hercules’ brothers, Epimedes
and Idas and Pæonæus and Iasus. I know that the altar of Idas is called
the altar of Acesidas by some. And at the ruins of the house of Œnomaus
are two altars, one of Household Zeus, built apparently by Œnomaus, the
other built afterwards I think to Zeus of the Lightning, when lightning
had struck the house. With reference to the great altar, called the
altar of Olympian Zeus, I have already spoken a little above. And near
it is the altar to Unknown Gods, and next that of Zeus the Cleanser,
and Victory, and next that of Zeus Chthonius. There are also altars
of all the gods, and one of Olympian Hera also made of _débris_, the
votive offering they say of Clymenus. And next to it is a joint altar
to Apollo and Hermes, because the tradition in Elis is that Hermes was
the inventor of the lyre, and Apollo the inventor of the lute. And next
are altars of Harmony, and Athene, and the Mother of the Gods. And
there are two altars very near the entrance to the race-course, one
they say of Hermes the Athlete, and the other of Opportunity. Ion the
Chian has I know written an Hymn to Opportunity, in which he traces
his genealogy, and makes him the youngest son of Zeus. And near the
treasure of the Sicyonians is an altar of Hercules, either one of the
Curetes, or the son of Alcmena, for both traditions are current. And
at what is called Gæum there is an altar to Earth, this too made of
_débris_: and they say there was an oracle of Earth earlier still. And
at the place called Stomium there is an altar to Themis. And before
the altar of Zeus, the god of thunder and lightning, is a fence on
all sides, and this altar too is not far from the great altar formed
of _débris_. Let my reader remember that I have not enumerated these
altars according to the position of their site, but taken them in a
rambling order, according to the order in which the people of Elis
sacrifice at them. And in the grove of Pelops there is a joint altar
to Dionysus and the Graces, and next one to the Muses, and one to the
Nymphs.




CHAPTER XV.


Outside Altis there is a building called the workshop of Phidias, who
used to work here at his statues, and there is an altar here to all the
gods in common. As you turn back again to Altis you see straight before
you the Hall of Leonidas. It is outside the temple precincts, and of
the various approaches to Altis is the only one used for processions.
It was built by Leonidas, a native of Elis, and now the Roman governors
of Elis make it their headquarters. It is separated by an alley from
the approach used for processions: the people of Elis call alleys what
the Athenians call bylanes. And there is in Altis to the left of the
Hall of Leonidas, an altar of Aphrodite, and an altar of the Seasons
next to it. And in the rear of the temple there is a wild olive tree
growing on the right: it is called the olive beautiful for its crowns,
and the victors at Olympia receive crowns of it. Near this wild olive
tree is a temple of the Nymphs, these too they call beautiful for
their crowns. And inside Altis there is an altar of Artemis of the
Market-Place, and on the right of the Hall of Leonidas is an altar to
the goddesses called Mistresses. Of the goddess whom they call Mistress
the portion of my work about Arcadia will give complete information.
And next is an altar of Zeus of the Market-Place, and, in front of what
is called the Seat of Honour, altars of Pythian Apollo, and Dionysus.
This last they say was erected by private people not so long ago. And
as you go to where the horses start is an altar, with the inscription
The Decider of Fate. This is plainly a title of Zeus who fore-knows
all human events, both what the Fates send, and others. And near this
is an oblong altar of the Fates, and next one of Hermes, and next
two of Zeus Supreme. And at the middle of the place where the horses
start are altars in the open air to Poseidon the Patron of Horses, and
Hera the Patroness of Horses, and near the pillar an altar of Castor
and Pollux. And at the entrance, near what is called the Rostrum, is
an altar of Ares the Patron of Horses, and an altar of Athene the
Patroness of Horses. And as you enter the Rostrum there are altars of
Good Fortune, and of Pan, and of Aphrodite. And in the interior of the
Rostrum the Nymphs called Acmenæ have an altar. And as you return from
the Portico which the people of Elis call Agnaptus’ from the name of
the Architect, there is on the right an altar of Artemis. And as you
enter Altis again by the road used for processions there are altars
behind the chapel of Hera of the river Cladeus and of Artemis, and next
to them one of Apollo, and a fourth of Artemis Coccoca, and a fifth
of Apollo Thermius. Thermius I conjecture at Elis will be the same
word as Thesmius (_Law-loving_) in Attic. But why Artemis was called
Coccoca I could not ascertain. There is a building in front of what
they call the Priest’s dwelling, and in the corner of it is an altar
of Pan. And the Town Hall of the people of Elis is within Altis, near
the outlet beyond the gymnasium, where the athletes have their races
and wrestling-matches. And in front of the doors of the Town Hall is
an altar of Artemis of the Market-Place. And in the Town Hall itself
as you pass into a room where there is a hearth, there is an altar of
Pan on the right of the entrance. And the hearth itself is made of
_débris_, and there is a fire on it burning continually day and night.
From this hearth as I have already stated they remove the _débris_ to
the altar of Olympian Zeus, and the height of that altar is largely due
to contributions from this hearth.

  And once in every month the people of Elis sacrifice at the altars
which I have mentioned. And they sacrifice in a certain primitive
fashion; for they burn frankincense on the altars and cakes kneaded
with honey. And they decorate the altars with olive branches, and pour
out libations of wine. But they do not offer libations of wine to the
Nymphs, or the Mistresses, or at the joint altar of all the gods.
And the sacrifices are conducted by the priest, who has office for
one month, and by the seers, the libation-offerers, the Interpreter
of Antiquities, the flute-player, and the wood-cutter. But the words
that they use in the Town Hall, and the Hymns which they sing, I am
not allowed to introduce into my account. And they pour libations not
only to Greek gods, but to the god of Libya, and to Hera of Ammon,
and to Parammon (a title of Hermes). It is manifest also that from
time immemorial they have consulted the oracle at Libya, and there are
altars in the temple of Ammon, votive offerings of the people of Elis:
and there are inscribed on them the questions of the people of Elis,
and the answers returned by the god, and the names of those who went
to Ammon from Elis. All this is in the temple of Ammon. The people of
Elis also pour libations to heroes, and the wives of heroes, who are
honoured in Elis or Ætolia. And the Hymns sung in the Town Hall are in
the Doric dialect, but by whom composed they do not tell us. The people
of Elis also have a banqueting-hall, (inside the Town-Hall, opposite
the room where the hearth is,) where they entertain the victors at
Olympia.




CHAPTER XVI.


Next ought I to describe the temple of Hera, and all that is worth
narrating in it. The people of Elis have a tradition that the people
of Scillus in Triphylia built it about 8 years after Oxylus became
king at Elis. Its architecture is Doric, there are pillars all round
it, one pillar in a chamber at the back of the temple is of oak. And
the length of the temple is 63 feet. The architect’s name is not
recorded. And every fifth year 16 matrons weave a shawl for Hera, and
the same number preside over her games. And the contest is a race for
maidens of various ages: in the first race are the youngest, and next
those slightly older, and last of all the eldest. And they all run
with their hair down their back, a short tunic below the knee, and
their right shoulder bare to the breast. They use in this contest the
regular race-course at Olympia, but make it a sixth part of a stade
shorter. And the victors receive crowns of olive, and part of the
heifer sacrificed to Hera: and paintings of them are made for Hera. And
the 16 matrons who preside over the games have as many handmaids. They
trace this contest of the maidens back to ancient times, saying that
Hippodamia in gratitude to Hera for her marriage with Pelops selected
16 matrons, and in concert with them inaugurated these games to Hera.
And they record that Chloris (with the exception of one brother the
only surviving child of Amphion) was the victor. And what I learnt
about the children of Niobe I have narrated in my account about Argos.
About these 16 matrons they have also the following tradition. They
say that Damophon, the tyrant at Pisa, did many grievous injuries to
the people of Elis, and on his death, as the people of Pisa had not
publicly sanctioned his ill deeds, the people of Elis were willing to
annul their charges against them, so 16 of the principal cities in Elis
at that day selected each one matron of age and merit and good name
to arbitrate on any claims. And the cities from which they selected
matrons were Elis and 15 others, and thus their differences with the
people of Pisa were arranged. And afterwards the same 16 were told off
to make all the arrangements about the Hera Festival, and to weave the
shawl for Hera. These 16 matrons also have two dances, one they call
Physcoa’s dance, and the other’s Hippodamia’s. Physcoa the tradition
goes was from hollow Elis, and lived in the parish they call Orthia,
and was mother by Dionysus of a boy called Narcæus, who, when he grew
up, warred with the neighbouring tribes and came to great power, and
built a temple of Athene Narcæa: and Dionysus was they say first
worshipped by Narcæus and Physcoa. Physcoa had other honours besides
the dance called after her name. The number of matrons is still kept up
by the people of Elis, but they are somewhat differently chosen. For
as they are divided into 8 tribes they select two matrons from each.
And the functions of these 16 matrons and the Umpires of Elis are never
commenced till after the sacrifice of a pig and lustration with water.
And the lustration takes place at the fountain Piera, which is situated
in the plain between Olympia and Elis. All these things are as I have
described them.




CHAPTER XVII.


And in Hera’s temple there is a statue of Zeus, and also one of Hera
seated on a throne, and standing by is a person with a beard and helmet
on his head. And the workmanship is very simple. And next them the
Æginetan Smilis has delineated the Seasons sitting on thrones. And near
them is a statue of Themis as the mother of the Seasons, the design
of Doryclidas, a Lacedæmonian by race, and the pupil of Dipœnus and
Scyllis. And there are five Hesperides by Theocles, a Lacedæmonian
also, the son of Hegylus, who is also said to have been a pupil of
Scyllis and Dipœnus. And Athene with a helmet and spear and shield is
they say by the Lacedæmonian Medon, who was the brother of Doryclidas,
and learnt his art also from Scyllis and Dipœnus. And Proserpine and
Demeter sit, Apollo and Artemis stand, opposite one another. And
there are statues also of Leto and Fortune and Dionysus, and a winged
Victory, who designed them I cannot tell, but they appear to me very
antique. What I have enumerated are in ivory and gold: but in later
times there were other statues placed in the temple of Hera, as a stone
Hermes carrying Dionysus as a babe, by Praxiteles; and Aphrodite in
brass, by Cleon of Sicyon, whose master was Antiphanes, of the school
of Periclytus the pupil of the Argive Polycletus. And before Aphrodite
there is a little golden boy seated, by the Carthaginian Boethus, which
was brought here from what is called Philip’s house, as well as some
statues in gold and ivory, as Eurydice the wife of Philip, and Olympias.

  * * The chest is of cedar and has figures on it, some in ivory, some
in gold, some carved on the cedar. In this chest Cypselus, the tyrant
of Corinth, was hid by his mother at his birth, as the Bacchidæ were
eager to find him. On account of his safety his descendants, called
the Cypselidæ, made the chest a votive offering at Olympia, and the
Corinthians of that day called chests _cypselæ_: that is the origin of
the name Cypselus given to the boy, so they say. And on the chest there
are inscriptions in large letters in an old handwriting: some of this
writing is straight, other parts are written in what the Greeks call
ox-fashion. That is, when one line is finished the next begins where
that left off and runs backward, and so on like the double course on
the race ground. There are also inscriptions on the chest that are very
puzzling and difficult to make out. And if you begin to examine the
chest all over, beginning at the lower part, you will see first Œnomaus
pursuing Pelops and Hippodamia. Each of them have a pair of horses
but those of Pelops have wings. And next is the house of Amphiaraus,
and some old woman is carrying Amphilochus the baby, and in front of
the house is Eriphyle with a necklace, and near her her daughters
Eurydice and Demonassa, and the little boy Alcmæon naked. Asius in his
poems has also represented Alcmena as the daughter of Amphiaraus and
Eriphyle. And Baton, the charioteer of Amphiaraus, has the reins in one
hand and a lance in the other. And one of Amphiarus’ feet is in the
chariot, and his sword is drawn, and he is turned towards Eriphyle,
and in his rage can scarce refrain from rushing at her. And next to
Amphiaraus’ house are the games in memory of Pelias, and the spectators
are looking on the contests. There is Hercules sitting on a seat, and
his wife behind him, but her name is not given, she is piping with
Phrygian and not Greek pipes. And there are Pisus the son of Perieres
and Asterion the son of Cometes driving a pair of horses, the latter is
said to have sailed in the Argo, and Pollux and Admetus, and Euphemus
the son of Poseidon (according to the tale of the poets), and the
companion of Jason on his voyage to Colchi, he also was victorious
in the pair-horse-race. And there are Admetus and Mopsus, the son of
Ampyx, both famous boxers. And in the midst is a man playing on the
flute, as in our day they are still wont to do in the leaping contest
in the pentathlum. And Jason and Peleus are wrestling, they are very
evenly matched. And there is Eurybotas throwing his quoit, a man famous
as a quoit-player whoever he was. And there are Melanion and Neotheus
and Phalareus and Argeus and Iphiclus ready for the race: and Acastus
is holding out the crown to the victor, who was Iphiclus, the father
of Protesilaus who fought at Ilium. There are also some tripods as
prizes for the winners, and there are the daughters of Pelias, of whom
the name of Alcestis only is inscribed. Iolaus too, who voluntarily
shared in Hercules’ Labours, is there, just having come in first in the
chariot-race. And this is the last of the games in memory of Pelias.
And there is Athene standing by Hercules who is shooting the hydra,
the monster that infested the river Amymone. And because Hercules was
well-known, from his great size as well as the nature of the contest,
his name is not written underneath. And there is Phineus the Thracian,
and the sons of Boreas driving away the Harpies from him.




CHAPTER XVIII.


On the second side of the chest, on the left, to take them in their
order, is a woman supporting with her right hand a white child
sleeping, and with her left a black child like the sleeping child,
but with both its feet twisted. The inscriptions shew, what one would
have inferred without any inscriptions, that they are Death and Sleep
with their nurse Night. And there is a comely woman dragging along an
ugly one, with one hand holding her fast, and with the other beating
her with a rod, this is Justice punishing Injustice. And there are two
women pounding with pestles into mortars, apparently compounding drugs,
but there is no inscription in reference to them. But about the man and
woman following him there are two hexameter lines as follows, “Idas is
leading away from the temple by no means against her will Marpessa of
the beautiful ancles, whom Apollo snatched away for himself.”

  And there is a man clad in a tunic, with a cup in his right hand and
in his left a necklace, and Alcmena is seizing them. According to the
Greek tradition, Zeus assumed the appearance of Amphitryon, and so
made Alcmena welcome him as her husband. And there is Menelaus with
a breastplate and sword pursuing Helen to kill her, plainly during
the sack of Ilium. And there is Jason on the right hand of Medea, who
is sitting on a throne, and Aphrodite is standing by her. And the
inscription relative to them is,

  “Jason is wooing Medea, Aphrodite is encouraging them.”

  The Muses are also represented singing and Apollo leading off, and
the inscription is as follows,

    “Here is the king, the son of Leto, far-darting Apollo,
    And round him the Muses, a graceful band, whom he leads in
        the songs.”

And Atlas is bearing up Heaven and Earth (according to the legend) on
his shoulders, and in his hands are the apples of the Hesperides. And
who the man is with a sword advancing to Atlas is nowhere written, but
it is evident to all that it is Hercules. This is all the inscription,

  “Atlas here is bearing up Heaven, he will neglect the apples.”

  There is also Ares in full armour leading off Aphrodite. The
inscription under him is Enyalius. There too is the maiden Thetis,
and Peleus is laying hold of her, and from Thetis’ hand a serpent is
about to dart at Peleus. And there are the sisters of Medusa with wings
pursuing the fleeing Perseus. His name only is given.

  The third side of the chest is devoted to military views. Most of
the soldiers to be seen are infantry, but there are also some cavalry
in two-horse war-chariots. And some of the soldiers are you can see
engaging, while others are recognizing and greeting one another. The
antiquarians have two explanations of this, the one party say that it
is the Ætolians with Oxylus and the ancient people of Elis, and that
they are fraternizing and exhibiting friendliness to one another in
remembrance of their ancient consanguinity, the other party say that
it is the people of Pylos and the Arcadians fighting near the town of
Pheia and the river Iardanus. No one would have _prima facie_ expected
that the ancestor of Cypselus, being a Corinthian and in possession
of the chest, would have purposely passed over Corinthian history,
and artistically portrayed on the chest foreign and even immaterial
events. So the following is the view I am inclined to form. Cypselus
and his ancestors came originally from Gonussa beyond Sicyon, and were
descended from Melas the son of Antasus. And Aletes would not receive
Melas and his army into the city, as I have stated before in my account
of Corinth, thus disobeying the oracle at Delphi, until at last,
as Melas paid every attention to him, and whenever he was rejected
returned again with entreaty, Aletes admitted him but not with a good
grace. One would conjecture therefore that the forces of Melas are here
portrayed.




CHAPTER XIX.


And on the 4th side of the chest on the left Boreas is carrying off
Orithyia, and he has serpents’ tails instead of feet. And there is
the fight between Hercules and Geryon, who was three men in one. And
there is Theseus with a lyre, and near him Ariadne with a garland. And
Achilles and Memnon are fighting and their mothers are standing by.
And there is Melanion, and Atalanta by him with a fawn. And Strife,
looking most hateful, stands by the duel (after challenge) between Ajax
and Hector. A very similar Strife has been depicted in the temple of
Ephesian Artemis by the Samian Calliphon, who painted the battle at the
ships of the Greeks. There are also on the chest figures of Castor and
Pollux, one of them without a beard, and Helen between them. And Æthra,
the daughter of Pittheus, in a dark dress is prostrate on the ground
at the feet of Helen. And the inscription is an Hexameter line and one
word more.

  “Castor and Pollux ran off with Helen, and dragged Æthra from Athens.”

  These are the very words. And Iphidamas the son of Agenor is lying on
the ground, and Coon is fighting with Agamemnon over his dead body. And
Fear with the head of a lion is on Agamemnon’s shield. And this is the
inscription over the corpse of Iphidamas,

  “This is Iphidamas, Coon bestrides him in the fight.”

  And on Agamemnon’s shield,

  “Here is what mortals call Fear, Agamemnon has got him.”

  And Hermes is bringing to Paris, the son of Priam, the goddesses to
the choice of beauty, and the inscription here is,

  “Here is Hermes showing to Paris the dainty sight of Hera and Athene
and Aphrodite in all their beauty.”

  And Artemis--I know not why--has wings on her shoulders, and in her
right hand she has a leopard, in her left a lion. And there is Ajax
dragging Cassandra from the statue of Athene, and the inscription is,

  “Locrian Ajax is dragging Cassandra from Athene.”

  And there are the sons of Œdipus, Polynices has fallen on his knees,
and Eteocles is pressing him hard. And behind Polynices stands a
monster with teeth as sharp as a wild beast’s, and with crooked claws.
And the inscription says that it is Doom, and that Polynices was
carried off by Fate, and that Eteocles’ end was just. And there too is
bearded Dionysus lying down in a cave, clad in a long garment, with a
golden bowl in his hand: and there are clusters of vine round him, and
apples, and pomegranates.

  The topmost side of the chest, for there are five in all, has no
inscription, but one can easily conjecture what the representations
are. In a cave there is a woman sleeping with a man upon a bed, and we
infer that they are Odysseus and Circe from the number of handmaids
in front of the cave, and from their tasks. For the women are four in
number, and they are engaged just as Homer has represented. And there
is a Centaur, not with all his feet horses’ feet, for his forefeet are
those of a man. And there are pair-horse chariots and women seated
on the chariots: and the horses have gold wings, and a man is giving
arms to one of the women. This is conjectured to refer to the death of
Patroclus. For it is the Nereids on the chariots, and Thetis who is
receiving arms from Hephæstus. For he who is giving the arms is lame,
and behind is a servant with smith’s tongs. And the tradition about
Chiron the Centaur is that, though he had left this world and been
received into heaven, he returned to earth to comfort Achilles. And
there are two maidens in a carriage drawn by mules, one is driving and
the other has a veil on her head, they are thought to be Nausicaa, the
daughter of Alcinous, and her attendant driving to the wash. And the
man shooting at the Centaurs and killing some of them is manifestly
Hercules, for this was one of his great feats.

  Who it was that constructed this chest it is quite impossible to
conjecture: the inscriptions on it might have been composed by anybody,
but suspicion points to Eumelus the Corinthian, both on other grounds,
and because of the Processional Hymn which he composed in reference to
Delos.




CHAPTER XX.


There are also here besides the chest several votive offerings, as a
bed of no great size adorned with much ivory, and the quoit of Iphitus,
and the table on which the crowns for the victors are deposited. The
bed was they say a plaything of Hippodamia: and the quoit of Iphitus
has written on it the armistice between the people of Elis and the
Olympians not straight down it, but all round the quoit: and the table
is of ivory and gold, the design of Colotes, who was they say a native
of Heraclea. And those who take interest in artificers say that he
was a Parian and the pupil of Pasiteles, who was himself the pupil
of....[73] There too are statues of Hera, and Zeus, and the Mother
of the Gods, and Hermes, and Apollo, and Artemis. And behind is a
representation of the games. On one side is Æsculapius and Hygiea, one
of the daughters of Æsculapius, and Ares and Contest by him, and on
another is Pluto and Dionysus and Proserpine and some Nymphs, one of
them with a ball. And Pluto has his key, with which (they say) what is
called Hades is locked, and then no one can return from it.

  An account which I received from Aristarchus, the Interpreter of
Antiquities at Olympia, I must not omit. He said that in his youth,
when the people of Elis restored the roof of the temple of Hera, the
body of a dead man in heavy armour, who had been badly wounded, was
found between the sham roof and the roof on which the tiles lay. This
man was a combatant in the battle fought inside Altis between the
Lacedæmonians and the people of Elis. For the people of Elis climbed
up to the temples of the gods, and all high buildings alike, for the
purpose of defence. This man therefore probably got up into that place,
in a fainting condition from his wounds, and, on his death, neither the
heat of summer nor the chills of winter would be likely to injure his
dead body, as he lay stowed away and covered up. And Aristarchus added,
that they carried the corpse outside Altis and buried it armour and
all.

  And the pillar, which the people of Elis call the pillar of Œnomaus,
is as you go from the great altar to the temple of Zeus, and there are
4 pillars on the left and a roof over them. These pillars support a
wooden one worn out by age, and only held together by iron clamps. This
pillar was once according to tradition in the house of Œnomaus: and
when the god struck the house with lightning, the fire consumed all the
house but this one pillar. And a brazen tablet contains some Elegiac
lines referring to this.

  “I am the only vestige, stranger, of a famous house, I once was a
pillar in Œnomaus’ house, but now near Zeus I am in iron clamps in
honour: the destructive fire has not consumed me.”

  Another curious thing happened on the spot in my time. A senator of
Rome won the prize at Olympia, and wishing some record of his victory
to survive in the shape of a brazen statue with an inscription, dug for
a foundation, close to this pillar of Œnomaus, and the diggers found
fragments of arms and bridles and bits. These I myself saw dug up.

  The temple, which is large in size and of Doric architecture, they
call to this day the Temple of the Mother, preserving its ancient name,
though there is no statue in it of the Mother of the Gods, but only
some statues of Roman Emperors. It is inside Altis, and there is a
round building called Philip’s House, on the top of which is a brazen
poppy as a clamp for the beams. This building is on the left hand as
you go to the Town Hall, and is built of baked brick, and there are
some pillars round it. It was built for Philip after the fatal defeat
of the Greeks at Chæronea. And there are statues there of Philip, and
Alexander, and Amyntas the father of Philip. They are by Leochares in
ivory and gold, like the statues of Olympias and Eurydice.




CHAPTER XXI.


And now I shall proceed to the account of the statues and votive
offerings, which I do not care to mix up together. In the Acropolis
at Athens all the statues and everything else equally are votive
offerings: but at Altis the votive offerings are in honour of the
deity, but the statues of the prizemen are merely a memorial of the
contests. Of them I shall speak hereafter: I shall now take the most
remarkable votive offerings in order.

  As you go to the race-course from the Temple of the Mother there is
on the left at the end of the mountain Cronius a basement of stone,
near the mountain, and some steps to it. On this basement there are
some brazen statues of Zeus, made with the money from a fine imposed on
some athletes who had behaved shamefully at the games. These statues
are called in the national dialect _Zanes_. They were six in number at
first and were put up in the 98th Olympiad. For Eupolus the Thessalian
bribed his rivals in boxing to let him win the prize, Agenor from
Arcadia, and Prytanis from Cyzicus, and Phormio from Halicarnassus, who
was the champion in the preceding Olympiad. This was the first foul
play they say at the boxing matches, and Eupolus and those who had been
bribed by him were fined by the people of Elis. Two of the statues
are by Cleon of Sicyon, the modeller of the remaining four we do not
know. And all these statues, but the third and fourth, have elegiac
lines on them. The first says that not with money, but swiftness of
foot and bodily vigour, ought one to win prizes at Olympia. And the
second says that that statue is raised in honour to the deity, and from
piety on the part of the people of Elis, and to inspire fear in such
athletes as do not play fair. As to the fifth and sixth, the gist of
the inscription on one is a panegyric of the people of Elis, and not
least for their punishment of the cheating boxers, and on the other a
didactic precept to all the Greeks that nobody is to bribe to win the
prize at Olympia.

  And subsequently to Eupolus they say that the Athenian Callippus,
when contending for the pentathlum, bribed his antagonists in the 112th
Olympiad. And when he and his antagonists were fined by the people
of Elis, the Athenians sent Hyperides to beg the people of Elis to
remit the fine. And when the people of Elis refused this favour, the
Athenians treated them with much hauteur, not paying the money and
keeping away from Olympia, till the god at Delphi told them he would
no longer give them any oracular responses, till they paid the fine
to the people of Elis. And when they paid, six more statues were made
for Zeus, with elegiac verses on them no less severe than those about
the fine of Eupolus. And the purport of these verses on the first
statue is that the statues are erected in accordance with the oracular
direction of the god, who honoured the decision the people of Elis had
come to about the competitors for the pentathlum. And the second and
third likewise praise the people of Elis for their conduct in the same
matter. And the fourth desires to point out that the contest at Olympia
is one of merit and not of money. And the inscriptions on the fifth
and sixth shew, one why the statues were made, and the other that the
oracle came to the Athenians from Delphi.

  And next to those I have enumerated are two statues, made from a
fine imposed on some wrestlers, whose names are unknown both to me and
the Antiquarians of Elis. There are some inscriptions also on these
statues, the first is that the Rhodians paid a fine to Olympian Zeus
for the cheating of their wrestler. And the second is that the statue
was made out of fines imposed on those who wrestled for bribes. And
the Antiquarians of Elis say that the other statues in connection with
athletes were erected in the 178th Olympiad, when Eudelus was bribed
by the Rhodian Philostratus. I find a discrepancy between this account
and the public records of the people of Elis as respects the victors
at Olympia. For in these records they say that Straton of Alexandria
in the 178th Olympiad won on the same day the prize both in the
pancratium and in the wrestling. Alexandria, at the mouth of the Nile
near Canopus, was built by Alexander, the son of Philip, on the site
of a former town of no great size called Rhacotis. In the generation
before Straton 3, and 3 after his day, are famous for having received
the crown of wild olive both for the pancratium and the wrestling. The
first was Caprus a native of Elis, and next of the Greeks beyond the
Ægean the Rhodian Aristomenes, and next Protophanes of the Magnetes at
Lethæus. And after Straton Marion, also from Alexandria, and Aristeas
from Stratonice (both the region and city were anciently called
Chrysaoris), and last Nicostratus from the Cilicians by the sea, though
he had little in common with the Cilicians but nominally. For, when he
was quite a child, he was kidnapped from Prymnessus a town in Phrygia
by robbers, who took him to Ægeæ and sold him to the highest bidder.
He was of no obscure family, and some time afterwards his purchaser
dreamed that a lion’s whelp lay under the truckle bed on which he used
to sleep. When Nicostratus grew to man’s estate he had several other
victories at Olympia in the pancratium and in wrestling.

  And among others that were fined by the people of Elis afterwards was
a boxer from Alexandria in the 218th Olympiad. His name was Apollonius,
his surname Rhantes, for it is customary among the people of Alexandria
to have surnames. He was the first Egyptian condemned by the people of
Elis for neither giving nor receiving money, but for the impropriety
of coming too late, for which he was not allowed to take part in the
games. As to his excuse that he was detained by contrary winds in the
Cyclades, Heraclides, also an Alexandrian, proved it to be a falsehood:
and said he was really too late because he had been collecting money
from the games in Ionia. Accordingly Apollonius and all others not
present at the appointed time for the boxing matches were not allowed
by the people of Elis to take part in the games, but to Heraclides they
gave a crown without a contest. Thereupon Apollonius, who had on his
boxer’s cæstus, rushed at Heraclides, and attacked him fiercely, just
as he had received his crown of wild olive, and he fled for refuge
to the Umpires. This hotheadedness was severely punished. There are
also two statues made in our own times. For in the 226th Olympiad they
detected some boxers bribing to get the prize. The money of their fine
went to make two statues of Zeus, one on the left of the entrance to
the course, and the other on the right. Didas was the name of one of
these boxers, and the other, who gave the bribe, was Sarapammon, both
were from the same district, the latest one formed in Egypt, called
Arsinoites. It is wonderful indeed that from any quarter people should
have been found to despise the god at Olympia, and to receive or give
bribes in connection with the games, but still more wonderful that any
of the people of Elis should have ventured to act in that manner. But
it is said that Damonicus, a native of Elis, acted so in the 192nd
Olympiad. For when Polyctor (the son of Damonicus) and Sosander (the
son of Sosander) a native of Smyrna had descended to the arena for the
wrestling match, Damonicus, being very anxious that his son should have
the victory, bribed the younger Sosander. And when the circumstances
got known, the Umpires fined the parents, turning their vengeance on
them because they were really the guilty parties. Statues were made
with this money too: one in the gymnasium at Elis, the other in Altis,
in front of what is called the Painted Portico, because there were
in ancient times paintings on the walls. This Portico is called by
some the Portico of Echo, because in it a word is re-echoed 7 times,
sometimes even more frequently.

  And they record that the pancratiast Serapion, a native of
Alexandria, in the 201st Olympiad was so afraid of those who were to
compete with him, that the day before the contest he absconded. He is
the only Egyptian, or indeed member of any nationality, that was ever
fined for cowardice in the games.




CHAPTER XXII.


Such are the statues made out of fines as far as I could ascertain.
There are also other statues of Zeus, some erected publicly, some
privately. There is also an altar in Altis near the entrance to the
course. On this altar the people of Elis do not sacrifice to any of the
gods, but the trumpeters and heralds stand here when they proclaim the
games. On the brazen base of this altar is a statue to Zeus, six cubits
in height, with a thunderbolt in each hand, the votive offering of the
people of Cynætha. And the young Zeus with a necklace round his neck is
the votive offering of Cleolas of Phlius.

  And near what is called the Hippodamium there is a semicircular
basement of stone, and statues on it of Zeus and Thetis and Aurora
supplicating Zeus for their children. These are in the midst of the
basement. And at each extremity of the basement stand Achilles and
Memnon in the attitude of antagonists. Similarly opposite to one
another stand a Greek and barbarian, Odysseus opposite Helenus, for
these are selected as most remarkable for wisdom in either army, and
Paris is opposite Menelaus from their old hostility, and Æneas opposite
Diomede, and Deiphobus opposite Ajax the son of Telamon. These are all
by Lycius the son of Myron, and are votive offerings of the people of
Apollonia near the Ionian sea. And there are some elegiac lines in
ancient characters under the feet of Zeus.

  “We are votive offerings from Apollonia, which long-haired Phœbus
built near the Ionian sea. Those who seized the borders of Abantis
offered this spoil from Thronium.”

  Now the region called Abantis and the town in it called Thronium were
in Thesprotia near the mountains Ceraunia. For when the Greek ships
were dispersed on their return from Ilium, the Locrians from Thronium
near the river Boagrius and the Abantes from Eubœa in 8 ships put in to
shore near the mountains Ceraunia. And there they dwelt and built the
town of Thronium, and by common consent called all the district they
lived in Abantis, and were afterwards beaten in war and expelled by
their neighbours of Apollonia. And Apollonia was a colony from Corcyra,
and the Corinthians had a share in the spoil.

  And as you go on a little further there is a Zeus looking east, with
an eagle in one hand and a thunderbolt in the other. And he has a crown
on his head composed of lilies. This statue is the votive offering of
the people of Metapontum, and the design of the Æginetan Aristonous.
But who Aristonous learnt his craft from we do not know, nor the
period in which he flourished. The Phliasians also erected as votive
offerings statues of Zeus and Asopus’ daughters and Asopus himself.
And this is the arrangement of the statues. Nemea comes first of the
sisters, and next her is Zeus laying hold of Ægina. And next Ægina
is Harpina, who according to the tradition of the Phliasians and the
people of Elis had an amour with Ares, and bare to him Œnomaus, the
king of the district of Pisa. And next to her are Corcyra and Thebe,
and Asopus comes last. The tradition about Corcyra is that she had an
amour with Poseidon, and a similar legend about Thebe and Zeus is sung
by Pindar.

  The men of Leontini erected a statue to Zeus privately and not
publicly. The height of it is 7 cubits, and Zeus has in his hands an
eagle and javelin according to the descriptions of the poets. And it
was erected by Hippagoras and Phrynon and Ænesidemus, not I think the
Ænesidemus who was tyrant at Leontini.




CHAPTER XXIII.


And as you pass on to the entrance to the council chamber there is a
statue of Zeus without an inscription, (and another as you turn to the
North). This is towards the East, and was erected by the Greeks who
fought at Platæa against Mardonius and the Medes. On the right of the
basement are inscribed the states that took part in the action, the
Lacedæmonians first, and next the Athenians, third the Corinthians,
fourth the Sicyonians, fifth the Æginetans, then the Megarians and
Epidaurians, of the Arcadians the men of Tegea and Orchomenus, and in
addition to these the inhabitants of Phlius Trœzen and Hermion, and
in Argolis the men of Tiryns, and of the Bœotians only the people of
Platæa, and of the Argives the inhabitants of Mycenæ, and the islanders
from Ceos and Melos, and the Ambraciotes from Thesprotia, and the
Tenii and people of Lepreum, the latter only from Triphylia, but the
Tenii not only from the Ægean and the Cyclades but also from Naxos and
Cythnus, and the men of Styra from Eubœa, and next to them the people
of Elis and Potidæa and Anactorium, and lastly the people of Chalcis
near the Euripus. Of these cities the following were unpeopled in my
day. Mycenæ and Tiryns were razed to the ground by the Argives after
the Persian war. And the Ambraciotes and men of Anactorium, who were
colonists from Corinth, were induced by the Roman Emperor Augustus to
form the colony of Nicopolis near Actium. And the people of Potidæa
were twice ejected from their country, by Philip, the son of Amyntas,
and earlier still by the Athenians, and though subsequently they were
restored by Cassander, yet the name of their city was changed to
Cassandrea in honour of their new founder. And the statue at Olympia,
that was a votive offering of the Greeks, was by Anaxagoras the
Æginetan, though those who have compiled a history of sculptors have
omitted to mention him.

  There is also in front of this statue of Zeus a brazen pillar, on
which are inscribed the conditions of peace for 30 years between the
Lacedæmonians and the Athenians, which was made by the Athenians after
their second reduction of Eubœa, in the 3rd year of that Olympiad
in which Crison of Himera won the prize. And this was one of the
conditions specified, that the city of the Argives should have no
share in this peace between the Athenians and Lacedæmonians, but that
privately the Athenians and Argives if they chose might be friendly to
one another. This is plainly stated in the conditions. And there is
another statue of Zeus near the chariot of Cleosthenes, (about which
I shall speak later), the votive offering of the Megarians, and the
design of the brothers Phylacus and Onæthus and their sons: I cannot
tell their period or country, or from whom they learned their craft.
And near the chariot of Gelon there is an old statue of Zeus with a
sceptre, the votive offering they say of the people of Hybla. There
are two Hyblas in Sicily, one called Gereatis, and the other to this
day called Hybla Major. Both are in the neighbourhood of Catana,
Hybla Major is quite deserted, but Gereatis is still inhabited, and
has a temple to the Hyblæan goddess who is worshipped in Sicily. And
I think it was from there that the statue of Zeus came to Olympia.
For Philistus the son of Archomenides records that they were the best
interpreters of portents and dreams, and the most noted for piety of
all the barbarians in Sicily. And near the votive offering of the
people of Hybla is a brazen pedestal and a Zeus upon it, eighteen feet
high I conjecture. And who offered it to the god, and whose design it
is, is stated in the following elegiac lines:

  “The people of Cleitor erected this votive offering to the god, with
the tithe collected from many cities taken by storm by them. And the
artificers were the Laconian brothers Aristo and Telestas.”

  I do not think these Laconians could have been men well known in
Greece, for else the people of Elis would have had something to say
about them, and still more the Lacedæmonians as they were their
citizens.




CHAPTER XXIV.


And near the altar of Zeus Laœtas and Poseidon Laœtas there is a Zeus
on a brazen basement, the gift of the Corinthian people, and the design
of Musus, whoever Musus was. And as you go from the council chamber
to the great temple there is on the left a statue of Zeus, crowned
with flowers, and in his right hand a thunderbolt. This was the design
of Ascarus a Theban, who was the pupil of the Sicyonian, * * and it
was a votive offering of the people of Thessaly. But if the people of
Thessaly offered it as a votive offering from spoil taken in a war with
the Phocians, it could not be what is called the Sacred War, for that
was fought before the Medes and the great king came to Greece. And not
far from this is a Zeus, which (as the inscription on it shews) was a
votive offering of Psophidius after success in war. And on the right of
the temple of great Zeus towards the east is a statue of Zeus 12 feet
high, the votive offering it is said of the Lacedæmonians, after they
had fought the second time with the Messenians who had revolted. And
there is an elegiac couplet inscribed on it.

  “Receive Olympian Zeus, Cronus’ great son, this noble statue from the
Lacedæmonians with propitious mind.”

  Of the Romans we know of none, either plebeian or patrician, earlier
than Mummius who put up a votive offering in any Greek temple, but he
out of the spoils of Achaia erected a brazen Zeus at Olympia. It stands
on the left of the votive offering of the Lacedæmonians, on the first
pillar of the temple. But the largest of the brazen statues of Zeus is
in Altis, and was a votive offering of the people of Elis after the war
with the Arcadians, it is 27 feet high. And near the temple of Pelops
there is a small statue of Zeus upon a not very lofty pillar, with
one of his hands extended. And opposite it are some votive offerings
in a row, statues of Zeus and Ganymede. The account of Homer is that
Ganymede was carried off by the gods to be cupbearer to Zeus, and that
Tros his father had some horses given him for his son. And this was a
votive offering of Gnathis the Thessalian, and the work of Aristocles
the pupil and son of Cleœtas. And there is another Zeus without a
beard, among the votive offerings of Micythus. Who this Micythus was,
whence he came, and why he offered these votive offerings at Olympia,
will be described by me hereafter. And if you go on a little from the
statue I have mentioned, there is straight before you another statue of
Zeus without a beard, the votive offering of the Elaitæ, who came down
from the plain of Caicus to the sea, and were the first settlers in
Æolis. Near this is another statue of Zeus, and the inscription on it
is that the people of the Chersonese in Cnidus erected it as a votive
offering after a triumph over their enemies. They erected also on one
side of Zeus Pelops, and on the other the river Alpheus. And most of
the city of the Cnidians is built on the continent of Caria, where
they performed most of their most memorable deeds, and the Chersonese
is an island lying near the continent, and connected with it by a
bridge: and the votive offerings to Olympian Zeus were dedicated by
the dwellers there, just as the Ephesians dwelling at Coressus could
say that their votive offering was a gift of the Ephesians generally.
There is also near the wall of Altis a statue of Zeus facing west
without an inscription: but tradition says it was erected by Mummius
from the spoils of his war with Achaia. But the statue of Zeus in
the Council Chamber is of all the statues of Zeus most calculated
to frighten wicked men, his Title is Zeus the God of Oaths, and he
has a thunderbolt in each hand. At this statue it is customary for
the athletes, their fathers and brothers, and also their trainers,
to swear over the entrails of a boar that they will not cheat at the
Olympian games. And the athletes make this further oath that they have
carefully trained for the space of 10 months. And the umpires also,
either of boys or the colts that compete in the races, swear to give
their decisions honestly and without bribes, and not to reveal the
reasons for their selection of the winners. What they do with the boar
afterwards I forgot to ask, but it was the custom among all the more
ancient sacrificers, that the victim over whom oaths were taken should
not be eaten by anybody: as Homer’s evidence very plainly shews, for
the boar on whose entrails Agamemnon swore solemnly that Briseis was a
maid as far as he was concerned, was thrown into the sea by the herald.
Witness the following lines:

    “He spoke, and cut the crackling off the boar
    With ruthless knife. And quick Talthybius
    Whirled it away into the surging sea,
    As food for fishes.”[74]

Such was the ancient use. And before the feet of Zeus the God of Oaths
there is a brazen tablet, on which some elegiac lines are inscribed,
that are meant to inspire fear in perjurers.




CHAPTER XXV.


Such are the statues of Zeus inside Altis, all of which I have
enumerated. For the statue near the great temple offered by a
Corinthian, is not an offering of the old Corinthians but of those who
rebuilt the city in Cæsar’s time, and is Alexander the son of Philip to
imitate Zeus. I shall also enumerate all the other statues which are
not representations of Zeus. And the effigies not erected in honour of
the deity, but in honour of men, I shall describe in my account of the
athletes.

  The Messenians at the Sicilian Strait, who used to send to Rhegium,
according to old custom, a chorus of 35 boys and a choir-master and a
piper to the national feast, had on one occasion a terrible disaster,
none of those that were sent were saved, but the vessel that had the
boys on board perished boys and all in the depths of the sea. For the
sea at this strait is a most stormy one: for winds lash it to fury, and
two seas meet, the Sicilian and the Tyrrhenian: and even when the winds
are calm, there is a tremendous swell in the Strait from the strong ebb
and flow. And so many sea-monsters are there, that the air is tainted
with their scent, so that the shipwrecked mariner has no chance of
getting safe to shore. And if Odysseus had chanced to be wrecked here,
one can never believe that he could have swum off safe to Italy. But
a kind Providence in every conjuncture brings about some alleviation.
And the Messenians sorrowing at the loss of the boys, besides other
things to honour their memory, placed at Olympia brazen effigies of
them and their choir-master and piper. The old inscription shewed that
these effigies were votive offerings of the Messenians at the Sicilian
Strait: and subsequently Hippias, who was called by the Greeks the
Wise, wrote some elegiac lines on them. The effigies were by Callon of
Elis.

  And there is near the Promontory Pachynus, that faces towards Libya
and the South, the town of Motye, peopled by Libyans and Phœnicians.
And the people of Agrigentum were at war with the people of Motye,
and out of the spoil and booty they took from them erected as votive
offerings at Olympia some boys in brass, extending their right hands
like people praying to the deity. They are on the wall at Altis. I
conjectured they were by Calamis, and tradition states the same.
The races that inhabit Sicily are the Sicani and the Siceli and
the Phrygians, some of whom crossed over from Italy, and others
came from the river Scamander and the Troad. And the Phœnicians and
Libyans sailed to the island with a joint fleet, as a colony of the
Carthaginians. Such are the barbarous races in Sicily. And of Greeks
the Dorians and Ionians dwell in it, and a few Phocians and Athenians.

  And on the same wall are votive offerings from Agrigentum, two
statues of boyish Hercules naked. The Hercules shooting at the Nemean
lion is the votive offering of the Tarentine Hippotion, and the design
of the Mænalian Nicodamus. The other is the votive offering of the
Mendæan Anaxippus, and was brought here by the people of Elis: it used
to be at the end of the road leading from Elis to Olympia, called the
Sacred Road. There are also statues, from the Achæan race in common, of
those who, when Hector challenged a single Greek to single combat, drew
lots who it should be. They are near the great temple armed with spears
and shields. And right opposite on another basement is Nestor throwing
the lots into his helmet. And the number of those that drew lots for
the single combat with Hector are 8, for the 9th, which was Odysseus,
they say Nero carried to Rome, and of the 8 Agamemnon only has his name
inscribed, and it is written from right to left. And the one with the
device of a cock on the shield is Idomeneus, the descendant of Minos
and Pasiphae the daughter of the Sun. And the cock they say is sacred
to the Sun and heralds his approach. The inscription on the basement is,

  “To Zeus the Achæans, descendants of the divine Pelops the son of
Tantalus, erected these votive offerings.”

  And the name of the artificer is inscribed on the shield of Idomeneus,

  “This and many besides are the work of the skilful Onatas, the son of
Micon of Ægina.”

  And not far from the votive offering of the Achæans is Hercules
fighting with an Amazon on horseback for her belt. This is the votive
offering of Evagoras of Zancle, and the design of Aristocles of
Cydonia. Aristocles may be reckoned amongst the very ancient sculptors,
for though one cannot state his period exactly, it is manifest that he
lived before the change from the old name Zancle to its present one of
Messene.

  The Thasians also (who were Phœnicians originally, and sailed from
Tyre and other parts of Phœnice to Europe with Thasus the son of
Agenor), made a votive offering of Hercules at Olympia, the base as
well as the statue of brass. The height of the statue is 10 cubits,
in the right hand he holds his club, and in the left his bow. And I
heard in Thasos that they worshipped the same Hercules as the Tyrians
worship, but afterwards, when they became naturalized as Greeks, they
worshipped Hercules the son of Amphitryon. And the votive offering of
the Thasians at Olympia has the following elegiac couplet attached to
it,

    “Onatas the son of Micon made me, a dweller at Ægina.”

This Æginetan Onatas we should regard in the statuary art as second to
none since Dædalus and the Attic school.




CHAPTER XXVI.


The Dorian Messenians also, who received Naupactus from the Athenians,
erected at Olympia a Victory on a pillar, the design of the Mendæan
Pæonius, and made from spoils taken from the enemy, I imagine, when
they fought with the Acarnanians and Œniadæ. But the Messenians
themselves say that this Victory was erected for their share with the
Athenians in the action at Sphacteria, and that they did not insert the
name of the enemy from fear of the Lacedæmonians, and they could have
had no fear of the Œniadæ and Acarnanians.

  I found also many votive offerings of Micythus scattered about, and
three of them together, next to the statue of Iphitus of Elis and
Truce crowning him, _viz._ Amphitrite and Poseidon and Vesta, by the
Argive Glaucus. And near the left side of the great temple he placed
Proserpine the daughter of Demeter, and Aphrodite, and Ganymede, and
Artemis, and of the poets Homer and Hesiod, and of the gods again
Æsculapius and Hygiea. And among the votive offerings of Micythus is
Agon with the dumb bells. These dumb bells are fashioned as follows.
They are semicircular in shape though not a perfect semi-circle,
and are so constructed that the fingers can pass through, as they
do through the handles of a shield. And next the statue of Agon is
Dionysus, and the Thracian Orpheus, and the statue of Zeus which
I mentioned a little above. These are works of art of the Argive
Dionysius. Others besides they say were given by Micythus, but were
removed by Nero. And the Argives Dionysius and Glaucus had no master
in their craft that we know of, but the period when they flourished
is shewn by the fact that Micythus placed their works of art at
Olympia. For Herodotus informs us in his history that this Micythus
was the slave of Anaxilas the king at Rhegium, and was afterwards his
treasurer, and after his death went to Tegea. And the inscriptions
on these votive offerings make Micythus the son of Chœrus, and the
Greek colony of Rhegium, or Messene near the Strait, his native place.
But they do not mention his ever living at Tegea, and these votive
offerings at Olympia were the fulfilment of a vow for the recovery of
his son, who was wasting away in a consumption.

  And near the larger votive offerings of Micythus, the work of the
Argive Glaucus, is a statue of Athene with a helmet on her head and her
Ægis. This was made by Nicodamus the Mænalian, and is a votive offering
of the people of Elis. And next to Athene is a statue of Victory,
an offering of the Mantineans, for what war is not specified in the
inscription. And it is said to be an imitation by Calamis of the wooden
statue at Athens of Wingless Victory. And near the smaller votive
offerings of Micythus made by Dionysius are the Labours of Hercules
with the Nemean lion, and the hydra, and Cerberus, and the Erymanthian
boar. They were brought to Olympia by the men of Heraclea, who overran
the territory of the neighbouring barbarians the Mariandyni. Heraclea
is a town near the Euxine, and was colonized by the Megarians. The
Bœotians of Tanagra also had a share in the colony.




CHAPTER XXVII.


And opposite those I have mentioned are other votive offerings in a
row, facing the South, and very near the enclosure sacred to Pelops.
Among them are the votive offerings of Mænalian Phormis, who crossed
over from Mænalus to Sicily to Gelon the son of Dinomenes, and in the
army of Gelon, and afterwards in the army of Gelon’s brother Hiero,
displayed great valour, and advanced to such a pitch of fortune that
he offered these votive offerings at Olympia, and also some others
to Apollo at Delphi. His offerings at Olympia are two horses and two
charioteers, a charioteer by each horse. The first horse and groom is
by Dionysius the Argive, the second by the Æginetan Simo. And the first
has the following inscription on the side, the first line not in metre,

  “Phormis the Arcadian from Mænalus, now a Syracusan, offered me.”

  This is the horse about which the people of Elis have a tradition
on the power of lust in horses. It is evident that several remarkable
properties of this horse come from the cunning of a magician. In size
and beauty it is inferior to many to be seen in Altis: it has also the
tail knocked off, which makes it more unsightly still. Nevertheless
stallions not only in spring but all the year round are madly in lust
after it. For they rush into Altis, breaking their reins or escaping
from their drivers, and endeavour to mount this horse, with far greater
impetuosity than they exhibit to the handsomest mare alive whom they
had been accustomed to mount. And though their hoofs slip on the
polished basement they do not cease to neigh fiercely, and try to mount
this horse with frantic energy, till by whips or sheer strength they
get pulled off. There is no other way of getting them away from this
brazen horse.[75] I have seen in Lydia a different kind of marvel to
this horse of Phormis, but equally the cunning work of a magician.
Among the Lydians called Persici there are temples at Hierocæsarea and
Hypæpa, and in each of these temples there is a chamber in which are
ashes on an altar, not like other ashes in appearance. And a magician
enters into this chamber, and, after placing dry wood upon the altar,
first of all places a tiara on his head, and then calls on the gods in
a foreign tongue not understood by the Greeks. And this he chants from
a book, and the wood gets lighted evidently without fire and a bright
blaze shines forth from it. Let this digression suffice.

  And among these votive offerings is Phormis himself contending with
an enemy, and fighting with a second and even a third. And there is an
inscription stating that the soldier fighting is Mænalian Phormis, and
that it is a votive offering of the Syracusan Lycortas, who plainly
offered it out of affection to Phormis. The Greeks however call these
votive offerings of Lycortas the votive offerings of Phormis. And the
Hermes with a ram under his arm, and a helmet on his head, and a tunic
and cloak on, is not one of the votive offerings of Phormis, but was
offered to the god by the Arcadians of Pheneos. And the inscription
states that Onatas the Æginetan jointly designed it with Calliteles,
who must I think have been the pupil or son of Onatas. And not far
from the votive offering of the people of Pheneos is another statue of
Hermes with his herald’s wand, and the inscription on it states that it
was the votive offering of Glaucias of Rhegium, and the work of Callon
of Elis. And there are two brazen bulls, one the votive offering of
the people of Corcyra, the other of the Eretrienses, both by Philesius
of Eretria. Why the Corcyræans offered one bull at Olympia and another
at Delphi, I shall relate in my account of the Phocians. And about the
votive offering at Olympia I have heard the following circumstance.
A little boy sitting down under this bull had stooped down and was
playing, and suddenly lifting up his head dashed it against the brass,
and not many days afterwards died from the blow. The people of Elis
wanted to remove the bull from Altis as being blood guilty, but the god
at Delphi ordered the same expiatory sacrifices for the bull as the
Greeks ordain for involuntary homicide.

  There is under the plane-trees at Altis in the middle of the grove a
brazen trophy, and an inscription on the shield of the trophy, stating
that the people of Elis offered it out of spoils of the Lacedæmonians.
This was the battle in which the man lost his life who was found in
his armour in my day, when the roof of the temple of Hera was being
repaired. The votive offering of the Mendæans in Thrace very nearly
deceived me to think that it was the effigy of a competitor for the
pentathlum. It is near Anauchidas of Elis, and has ancient dumb-bells.
And the following elegiac couplet is written on the thigh,

  “To Zeus, the king of the Gods, the Mendæans put me here as
firstfruits, after taking Sipte by storm.”

  It seems that Sipte is a Thracian fort and city, and the Mendæans are
a Greek race from Ionia, and live a little inland from the sea, at the
town of Ænus.




FOOTNOTES:

[67] Reading ταύτῃ τῇ Σαμία, (altered into Σαμικῷ ductu literarum).

[68] Il. xxiii. 295.

[69] ἄλσος.

[70] Iliad, viii. 393-395.

[71] Iliad, xiii. 389. xvi. 482.

[72] See Book vi. ch. 22.

[73] Hiatus hic deflendus.

[74] Iliad, xix. 266-268.

[75] On this curious story see Bayle on _Hippomanes_.




BOOK VI.--ELIS. PART II.




CHAPTER I.


Next to my account of the votive offerings comes naturally mention of
the horses that contended, and of the athletes, and of amateurs also.
There are not statues of all the conquerors at Olympia, for even some
who displayed great prowess in the contests, or elsewhere, have yet
not obtained statues. These my subject bids me to pass over, for it is
not a catalogue of all the athletes that were victors at Olympia, but
an account of the statues and other votive offerings. Neither shall I
mention all the statues, as I well know some who won the crown of wild
olive from unexpected good fortune rather than their own exertions.
I shall therefore merely mention those who had more renown or finer
statues than others.

  On the right of the temple of Hera is a statue of the wrestler
Symmachus, the son of Æschylus, a native of Elis. And near him, from
Pheneos in Arcadia, is Neolaidas the son of Proxenus, who carried off
the prize for boxing among the boys, and next Archedamus the son of
Xenius, also a native of Elis, who beat all the boys in wrestling.
These statues were made by Alypus the Sicyonian, the pupil of Naucydes
the Argive. And the inscription on the statue of Cleogenes, the son
of Silenus, says that he was of the district, he won the prize with
a fast horse from his own stud. And next Cleogenes are Dinolochus,
the son of Pyrrhus, and Troilus, the son of Alcinous. They too were
natives of Elis, but their victories were not won in the same manner,
for Troilus owed his victory to his perfect pair of horses and team
of colts: partly also to his being umpire: and he was victor in the
102nd Olympiad. And from thenceforth there was a law among the people
of Elis that the umpires’ horses should not be admitted to the races.
His statue was by Lysippus. But the mother of Dinolochus dreamed that
she embraced her son after being crowned, and moved by this dream he
trained, and outran the other lads: and his statue is by Cleon of
Sicyon. As to Cynisca the wife of Archidamus, I have spoken previously
of her family and victories at Olympia, in my account of the kings of
the Lacedæmonians. And near the statue of Troilus is a basement of
stone, and a chariot and charioteer, and the effigy of Cynisca herself,
by Apelles. There are inscriptions also in reference to her. And next
her are some Lacedæmonians, who were victors in the horse-races.
Anaxander was the first victor proclaimed in the chariot-race. And the
inscription over him states that his grandfather was crowned earlier in
the pentathlum. He is represented as praying to the god. And Polycles,
surnamed Polychalcus, was victor in the chariot-race with 4 horses
abreast, and his effigy has in its right hand a riband. And by him
are two boys, one holding the wheel, the other asking for the riband.
And Polycles was victor with his horses, as the inscription over him
states, in the Pythian Isthmian and Nemean games.




CHAPTER II.


And the statue of the pancratiast next is by Lysippus. He carried off
the victory as pancratiast from the rest of the Acarnanians, and was
the first of his own countrymen. Xenarches was his name and he was the
son of Philandridas. And the Lacedæmonians, after the invasion of the
Medes, turned their attention more than any other Greeks to breeding
horses. For besides those that I have already mentioned, there are
statues of several other Spartan horse-breeders, next to the effigy
of the Acarnanian athlete, as Xenarches, and Lycinus, and Arcesilaus,
and Lichas his son. Xenarches also had further victories at Delphi and
Argos and Corinth. And Lycinus brought colts to Olympia, and as one
of them was rejected, he used his colts in the race of full-grown
horses and won the prize. And he set up two statues at Olympia, by the
Athenian Myro. And Arcesilaus and his son Lichas had two victories at
Olympia, and Lichas, as the Lacedæmonians were at that time excluded
from the games, entered himself for the chariot-race as a Theban,
and bound the victorious charioteer with a riband. For this the
Umpires scourged him. And it was on account of this Lichas that the
Lacedæmonians under Agis invaded Elis, when the fight took place at
Altis. And at the end of the war Lichas erected his statue here, but
the records of the people of Elis about the victors at Olympia say that
the Theban people, not Lichas, won the victory.

  And near Lichas is the seer of Elis, Thrasybulus, the son of Æneas of
the family of the Iamidæ, who practised divination for the Mantineans
against the Lacedæmonians under Agis the son of King Eudamidas, I
shall enter into the circumstances more fully in my account about the
Arcadians. And on the effigy of Thrasybulus there is a spotted lizard
creeping on his right shoulder, and a dog lies near him cut in half
as a victim and shewing its liver. Divination by kids and lambs and
calves is clearly an old practice among mankind, the Cyprians seem also
to have added divination by swine. But no nations are accustomed to
practise divination by dogs. Therefore it was apparently a peculiarity
of Thrasybulus to introduce this kind of divination. And the seers
called the Iamidæ were descendants of Iamus, who, as Pindar tells us in
one of his Odes, was the son of Apollo, and learnt his divination from
him.

  And close to the effigy of Thrasybulus is one of Timosthenes, a
native of Elis, who won the prize for boys in the course, and one of
the Milesian Antipater, the son of Clinopater, who beat all the boys
in boxing. And some Syracusans, who offered sacrifices at Olympia on
behalf of Dionysius, bribed the father of Antipater to let his son be
declared a Syracusan. But Antipater, despising the tyrant’s bribe,
declared himself a Milesian, and inscribed on his effigy that he was
a Milesian, and the first Ionian that had had his effigy at Olympia.
It was by Polycletus, and Timosthenes’ was by Eutychides of Sicyon, a
pupil of Lysippus. This Eutychides made a statue of Fortune for the
Syrians by the Orontes, which is greatly honoured by the people of that
district.

  And in Altis near the effigy of Timosthenes are statues of Timon
and his son Æsypus, the lad on horseback. For he won the prize on his
racer, while Timon was proclaimed victor in the chariot race. These
statues were made by Dædalus of Sicyon, who also erected a trophy
for the people of Elis, after their victory over the Laconians at
Altis. And the inscription over the Samian boxer states that Myco
was his trainer, and that the Samians are the best of the Ionians
both as athletes and naval heroes, but gives no information about the
particular boxer.

  And next is the statue of the Messenian Damiscus, who was victor
at Olympia when he was only 12. It is a very remarkable coincidence,
that, when the Messenians were exiles from the Peloponnese, their luck
at Olympia also failed. For except Leontiscus and Symmachus, who were
Sicilian Messenians from the Strait, no Messenian either from Sicily or
Naupactus was victor at Olympia, and the Sicilians say they were not
Messenians but old inhabitants of Zancle. However when the Messenians
returned to the Peloponnese, their luck also at Olympia returned. For
in the year after the restoration to Messene, when the people of Elis
celebrated the Olympian games, this Damiscus won the prize from all the
boys in the course, and afterwards won victories both at Nemea and at
the Isthmus in the pentathlum.




CHAPTER III.


Next to Damiscus is the statue of a man whose name is not recorded,
the votive offering of Ptolemy the son of Lagus. Ptolemy calls himself
a Macedonian in the inscription, though he was king of Egypt. There
is an inscription also over Chæreas of Sicyon a boy-boxer, stating
that his father was Chæremon, and that though young he was victor. The
inscription also states that the statue was by Asterion, the son of
Æschylus. And next to Chæreas there are statues of the Messenian boy
Sophius, and of Stomius a man of Elis, Sophius outran all the boys,
and Stomius won one victory in the pentathlum at Olympia, and three at
Nemea. And the inscription on Stomius records further that as leader
of the cavalry of the people of Elis he won a victory, and killed the
commander of the enemy, who had challenged him to single combat. And
the people of Elis say that he came from Sicyon and was ruler of the
Sicyonians, and that they themselves went on an expedition against
Sicyon in friendship to the Thebans together with a force from Bœotia.
It would appear therefore that an expedition against Sicyon must have
set out from Elis and Thebes after the reverse of the Lacedæmonians at
Leuctra.

  Next is the statue of the boxer Labax, the son of Euphron, who was
a native of Lepreus in Elis, and also one of the wrestlers from Elis,
Aristodemus the son of Thrasis, who had two victories in the Pythian
games. And the effigy of Aristodemus is by Dædalus the Sicyonian,
who was the pupil and son of Patrocles. And the statue of Hippos of
Elis, who beat all the boys in boxing, was by Democritus of Sicyon,
who learnt his art from the Athenian Critias through 4 intermediate
teachers. For Critias was the tutor of the Corcyræan Ptolichus, and
Amphion was the pupil of Ptolichus, and Piso of Calauria was the pupil
of Amphion, and Democritus was the pupil of Piso. And Cratinus from
Ægira in Achaia was the most handsome of all his contemporaries, and
the greatest wrestler. And as none of the boys could stand before him
in wrestling he was appointed by the people of Elis as teacher of the
boys. And his statue was by the Sicyonian Cantharus, whose father was
Alexis, and teacher Eutychides.

  And the effigy of Eupolemus of Elis was by the Sicyonian Dædalus, and
the inscription informs us about him that he was victor at Olympia over
men in the course, he also won two crowns at the Pythian games in the
pentathlum, and one crown at the Nemean games. It is further recorded
about Eupolemus that of the three umpires in the race two adjudged the
prize to him, and the third to the Ambraciote Leo, and that Leo at the
Council of Olympia subsequently got indemnity from both the umpires
who had adjudged the prize to Eupolemus.

  And the statue of Œbotas was set up by the Achæans in the 80th
Olympiad in accordance with the oracle at Delphi. He had been victor
in the course in the sixth Olympiad. How then could he have fought
with the Greeks at Platæa? For it was not till the 75th Olympiad that
Mardonius and the Medes met with the reverse at Platæa. I am bound to
record the traditions of the Greeks, but I need not believe all of
them. All else that happened to Œbotas shall be told in my account of
Achaia.

  And the statue of Antiochus was made by Nicodemus. Antiochus was a
native of Lepreus, and won the prize at Olympia for the pentathlum
for men once, and twice in the Pythian games, twice also at Nemea.
For the Isthmians were not frightened by the people of Lepreus as
they were by the people of Elis, for Hysmon of Elis, whose statue is
next to Antiochus, being an athlete, and having won the prize for the
pentathlum once at Olympia and once at Nemea, was plainly prevented,
like all other people of Elis, from trying his fortune at the Isthmian
games. It is also recorded of Hysmon that when he was a boy he had a
discharge, and that was why he trained for the pentathlum, that he
might become stronger in constitution, and free from disease. And
this training was destined to get for him many notable victories. His
statue is by Cleon, and he has in his hands some old-fashioned dumb
bells. And next to Hysmon is the statue of a wrestling boy from Heræa
in Arcadia, Nicostratus the son of Xenoclidas. It is by Pantias, who by
six intermediate links was a pupil of Aristocles the Sicyonian.

  And Dicon the son of Callibrotus won five races in the Pythian games,
and three in the Isthmian, and four at Nemea, and at Olympia one for
boys, two for men. And he has as many statues as he won victories at
Olympia. He was a native of Caulonia, and so proclaimed as a boy,
though afterwards for money he proclaimed himself a Syracusan. Now
Caulonia is a colony of Achæans in Italy, its founder was Typhon of
Ægium. And when Pyrrhus the son of Æacus and the Tarentines were at
war with the Romans, and several cities in Italy were destroyed, some
by the Romans, some by the people of Epirus, Caulonia was laid waste,
after being captured by the Campanians, who were the chief allies of
the Romans.

  Next to Dicon is a statue of Xenophon, the son of Menephylus, the
pancratiast from Ægium in Achaia, also one of Pyrilampes the Ephesian,
who obtained the victory in the long course. Xenophon’s statue is by
Olympus, Pyrilampes’ by a sculptor of the same name, not a Sicyonian,
but from Messene near Ithome.

  The Samians also erected a statue at Olympia to the Spartan Lysander
the son of Aristocritus. And the first of the inscriptions is,

  “In the conspicuous precincts of almighty Zeus I stand, the votive
offering of all the Samians.”

  This informs us who erected the statue. And the second inscription is
a panegyric on Lysander,

  “Immortal fame, Lysander, on your country and Aristocritus did you
confer by your splendid merit.”

  Manifest is it therefore that the Samians and other Ionians,
according to the Ionian proverb, whitewashed two walls.[76] For when
Alcibiades had a strong Athenian fleet in the neighbourhood of Ionia,
most of the Ionians paid their court to him, and there is a brazen bust
of Alcibiades in the temple of Hera among the Samians. But when the
Athenian fleet was taken at Ægos-potamoi, then the Samians erected this
statue of Lysander at Olympia, and the Ephesians placed in the temple
of Artemis statues of Lysander himself, and Eteonicus, and Pharax, and
other Spartans of no great renown in Greece. And when fortune veered
round again, and Conon won the sea-fight off Cnidus and Mount Dorium,
then the Ionians changed sides again, and you may see a brazen statue
of Conon and Timotheus at Samos in the temple of Hera, and likewise at
Ephesus in the temple of Artemis. This has been the case in all ages,
for all men, like these Ionians, pay court to the strongest.

CHAPTER IV.


And next to Lysander is the effigy of an Ephesian boxer, whose name
was Athenæus, and who beat all the boys that contended with him, and
next him is the Sicyonian pancratiast Sostratus, whose surname was
_Acrochersites_, because he laid hold of his adversary’s fingers and
tried to break them, and would not let go till he saw that he was going
to give in. And he had 12 victories at Nemea and Isthmus both together,
and in the Pythian games two, at Olympia three. The 104th Olympiad, in
which this Sostratus was victor for the first time, the people of Elis
do not record, because the games in that Olympiad were not instituted
by them but by the Pisæans and Arcadians. And next to Sostratus is
the wrestler Leontiscus, a Sicilian from Messene by the Strait. And
he is said to have been crowned by the Amphictyonians, and twice by
the people of Elis, and his wrestling is said to have been somewhat
similar to that of Sostratus of Sicyon in the pancratium, for he was
not an adept at wrestling his antagonists down, but he used to beat
them by trying to break their fingers. And his statue was by Pythagoras
of Rhegium, an excellent sculptor if ever there was one. And he learnt
his art they say from Clearchus who was also a native of Rhegium, and a
pupil of Euchirus. This Euchirus was a Corinthian, and pupil of Syadra
and Charta, who were both Spartans.

  And the boy with a fillet on his head must not be omitted by me, on
Phidias’ account and his fame as a statuary, for otherwise we don’t
know who it is a statue of. And there is a statue of Satyrus of Elis,
the son of Lysianax, of the family of the Iamidæ, who five times won
the prize for boxing at Nemea, and twice at Olympia, and twice at the
Pythian games. This statue is by the Athenian Silanion. And another
Athenian statuary Polycles, the pupil of the Athenian Stadieus,
has made a statue of the Ephesian pancratiast, Amyntas the son of
Hellanicus.

  And Chilon the Achæan of Patræ had two victories at Olympia in
wrestling among men, and one at Delphi, and 4 at Isthmus, and 3 at
Nemea. And he had a public funeral from the Achæans, as he was killed
in war. The inscription at Olympia bears me out.

  “I won the prize from men in wrestling twice in the Pythian and
Olympian games, three times at Nemea, four times at the Isthmus near
the sea, I Chilon of Patræ the son of Chilon, whom the Achæans gave a
public funeral to for his valour as he was killed in war.”

  Such is what the inscription records. And if one conjectures from the
age of Lysippus, who made the effigy, one must infer that the war in
which Chilon fell was either at Chæronea when he fought in company with
all the Achæans, or that he alone boldly volunteered to fight at Lamia
in Thessaly against Antipater and the Macedonians.

  And next to that of Chilon are two statues: one of Molpion, who
the inscription states was crowned by the people of Elis, and the
other, which has no inscription, is they say Aristotle of Stagira in
Thrace, and it was erected to him by some pupil or soldier, as he was
greatly honoured by Antipater and earlier still by Alexander. And
Sodamas from Assus in the Troas, near Mount Ida, was the first Æolian
that won the prize for boys in the course at Olympia. And next to
Sodamas is a statue of Archidamus, the son of Agesilaus, king of the
Lacedæmonians. Before the reign of this Archidamus I cannot find that
the Lacedæmonians erected a statue of anyone beyond their own borders.
But they sent I think a statue of Archidamus to Olympia, not only on
other accounts but also because of his death, for he died fighting
against the barbarians, and was the only one of the Spartan kings that
lacked sepulture. I have narrated the particulars at full length in my
account of Sparta. And Euanthes of Cyzicus had prizes for boxing, one
at Olympia as a man, and at Nemea and the Isthmian games as a boy. And
next to Euanthes is a horse-trainer and a chariot, and a girl mounting
the chariot. The man’s name is Lampus, and his native town was the
most recent of the Macedonian towns, and got its name from its founder
Philip the son of Amyntas. And the effigy of Cyniscus, the boy boxer
from Mantinea, was by Polycletus. And Ergoteles the son of Philanor,
who carried off two victories at Olympia in the long course, and as
many at the Pythian Isthmian and Nemean games, was not originally a
native of Himera, as the inscription states, but is said to have been a
Cretan from Gnossus: and being banished from thence in some faction he
went to Himera, and obtained citizenship there, and had other honours.
This is the probable explanation of his being proclaimed in the games
as a native of Himera.




CHAPTER V.


The statue which stands on a lofty pedestal is by Lysippus. It is the
statue of Polydamas, the son of Nicias, the largest man of our times.
There may have been larger men, but only the heroes or some mortal race
of giants earlier than the heroes. Scotusa, which was the native place
of Polydamas, is not inhabited in our day, for Alexander the king of
the Pheræans took it in time of peace, for when the people of Scotusa
were all gathered together in the theatre, for they held their meetings
there at that period, he surrounded it with targeteers and archers and
shot them all, and slew all besides that were in their prime, and sold
the women and children, and with the proceeds kept up a mercenary army.
This disaster happened to the people of Scotusa when Phrasiclides was
Archon at Athens, in the 102nd Olympiad, in the second year of which
Damon of Thuria was victor for the second time. And those that escaped
of the people of Scotusa were few, and even they were reduced still
further and left the town, when Providence brought a second reverse
upon all the Greeks in the war with the Macedonians. In the pancratium
several had notable victories, but Polydamas beside his crowns for the
pancratium had further renown for the following remarkable exploits.
The mountainous part of Thrace, inside the river Nestus that flows
through the territory of the people of Abdera, rears several wild
beasts and among them lions, who on one occasion attacked the army of
Xerxes, and made havoc of the camels that carried the corn. These lions
also frequently prowled about the country in the neighbourhood of Mount
Olympus, one side of which mountain faces Macedonia, another Thessaly
and the river Peneus. Polydamas unarmed slew a large and stout lion
on Mount Olympus: moved to this exploit from a desire to emulate the
actions of Hercules, who as the tradition goes vanquished the Nemean
lion. Another memorable feat of Polydamas is on record. He approached
a herd of cattle, and seized the strongest and wildest bull by one of
its hind feet, and held on fast by its hoofs, and would not let it go
though it kicked and struggled, till at last the bull exerting all its
strength got away from him, and left its hoofs in his hands. It is
also recorded of him that he stopped a chariot which the driver was
urging on at full speed, by laying hold of it behind with one hand, and
thus stopped both horses and charioteer. And Darius, the illegitimate
son of Artaxerxes, (who with the help of the Persian commonalty had
deposed Sogdius, Artaxerxes’ legitimate son, and usurped his kingdom),
when he became king sent messengers, for he had heard of the exploits
of Polydamas, and by promising rewards attracted him to his court at
Susa. And there he slew in single combat three of the Persians called
Immortals who had challenged him. And some of the exploits which I have
mentioned are recorded on the base of his statue at Olympia, others
in the inscription. But eventually the prophetic utterance of Homer
about trusting too much in one’s strength proved true of Polydamas,
for he too was destined to perish through too great confidence in his
strength.[77] On one occasion with several boon companions he entered
a cave in summer time, and somehow or other by some malign fortune the
top of the cave cracked, and was evidently going to fall in in no long
time. And when they perceived the impending disaster all his companions
fled, but Polydamas determined to remain, and stretched out his hands
in the intention of holding up this mass of rock and not being buried
under it, but he was crushed to death.




CHAPTER VI.


And next to the statue of Polydamas are two Arcadian athletes, and one
Athenian one. The first is the Mantinean Protolaus, the son of Dialces,
who beat all the boys in boxing, by Pythagoras of Rhegium, the second
is Narycidas, the son of Damaretus, a wrestler from Phigalia, by the
Sicyonian Dædalus, and the third is Callias, the Athenian pancratiast,
by the Athenian painter Micon. And there is a statue, by Nicodamus
of Mænalus, of the pancratiast from Mænalus, Androsthenes the son of
Lochæus, who carried off two victories from men. And next to these
is the statue of Eucles the son of Callianax, a Rhodian by birth
and of the family of the Diagoridæ, (for Diagoras was his maternal
grandfather), who won the prize for boxing among men at Olympia. His
statue is by Naucydes. And Polycletus the Argive, a pupil of Naucydes,
(not the Polycletus who made the statue of Hera), has made the statue
of a boy-wrestler, the Theban Agenor. It was made at the expense of the
Phocians, to whom Theopompus the father of Agenor had been friendly.
And Nicodamus, the statuary from Mænalus, made a statue of Damoxenidas,
the man-boxer from Mænalus. There is also an effigy of Lastratidas
the boy of Elis, who won the crown for wrestling, and also a victory
at Nemea among boys and beardless youths. And Paraballon the father
of Lastratidas won the prize in the double course, and excited the
emulation of posterity, by writing up the names of the victors at
Olympia in the gymnasium at Olympia.

  So far for these last mentioned: but I must not omit Euthymus the
boxer, or his victories and other feats. He was an Italian from Locri
near the promontory of Zephyrium, and his father’s name was Astycles.
But the natives of that country say that he was not the son of Astycles
but of the River Cæcinus, which is the boundary between the districts
of Locri and Rhegium, and has a peculiarity in respect to grasshoppers.
For the grasshoppers in Locri up to the river Cæcinus sing just as
other grasshoppers, but after you cross the Cæcinus they cease to sing
in the district of Rhegium. Euthymus then is said to be the son of this
River, and he won a boxing prize at Olympia in the 74th Olympiad, but
was not equally successful in the following Olympiad. For Theagenes
from Thasos, wishing to win in the same Olympiad prizes both for boxing
and the pancratium, outboxed Euthymus. Theagenes however could not
receive the wild olive crown for the pancratium, as in the contest
with Euthymus he was exhausted first. Moreover the umpires fined
Theagenes a talent as a fine to the god, and a talent for the injury
done to Euthymus, for they thought he insulted him in the boxing-match,
therefore they ordered him also to pay privately money to Euthymus. And
in the 76th Olympiad Theagenes paid his fine to the god, and in his
vexation would not again contend as a boxer: but Euthymus received the
crown for boxing both in that and the next Olympiad. And his statue is
by Pythagoras and is especially fine. And on his return to Italy he
fought against a Hero. The particulars are as follows. When Odysseus
was on his travels after the capture of Ilium they say he was driven
by the winds to several towns in Italy and Sicily, and among others to
Temesa; there they say one of his sailors in drink violated a maiden,
and for this outrage was stoned to death by the inhabitants. Thereupon
Odysseus not troubling himself about his death sailed off, but the
ghost of the man that had been stoned relentlessly continued to slay
indiscriminately the people of Temesa, pursuing all ages alike, till
the Pythian Priestess, when they intended to make a wholesale flitting
from Italy, forbade them to leave Temesa, and bade them propitiate the
Hero, by building him a temple in a grove set apart for that purpose,
and annually giving him as wife the handsomest girl in Temesa. As they
obeyed the orders of the oracle they had no further trouble with the
ghost. But Euthymus happened to arrive at Temesa at the time when this
annual offering to the ghost was being made, and inquired into the
matter, and had a strong desire to enter the temple and behold the
maiden. And when he saw her, he was first moved with pity and then
with love. And she swore that she would marry him if he saved her, and
Euthymus armed himself and awaited the approach of the ghost. In the
fight that ensued he was victor, and the Hero left the country, dived
into the sea and was never seen again, and the men of that region had
henceforth no more trouble from him, and the marriage of Euthymus was
celebrated with much pomp. I have also heard that Euthymus lived to
advanced old age, and did not die, but left mankind some other way.
I have also heard that Temesa is inhabited still, my informant was a
merchant that sails in those parts. I also have seen a painting, which
is an imitation of an older painting. In it is the young man Sybaris,
and the river Calabrus, and the well Lyca, and a hero-chapel, and
the town of Temesa. There too is the ghost whom Euthymus expelled,
dreadfully swarthy and most formidable in all his appearance, and
dressed in a wolfskin. And the letters in the painting give his name,
Lycas. So much for this legend.




CHAPTER VII.


And next to the statue of Euthymus is that of Pytharchus of Mantinea,
a runner in the course, and Charmides a boxer of Elis, both of whom
received prizes as boys. And when you have seen these you will come
to the statues of the Rhodian athletes, Diagoras and his family. They
are all together in the following order, Acusilaus with the prize for
boxing among men, and Dorieus, the youngest, who won three prizes in
succession at Olympia in the pancratium. Before Dorieus Damagetus, who
comes next, had won the prize against all comers in the pancratium.
Next to his 3 sons comes the statue of Diagoras, who won a victory
among men in boxing. And the statue of Diagoras is by the Megarian
Callicles, the son of that Theocosmus who made the statue of Zeus at
Megara. The sons also of Diagoras’ daughters practised as boxers and
won prizes at Olympia, among the men Eucles the son of Callianax and
Callipatira (the daughter of Diagoras), and among the boys Pisirodus,
whose mother dressed him up like a man and brought him to the Olympian
games, herself disguised as a trainer. This Pisirodus also has a
statue in Altis near his maternal grandfather. Diagoras they say
also came to Olympia with his sons Acusilaus and Damagetus. And the
young men being victorious at the festival bore their father on their
shoulders, who was pelted by the Greeks with flowers and congratulated
on his sons. On the female side Diagoras was a Messenian by extraction,
as he was descended from the daughter of Aristomenes. And Dorieus the
son of Diagoras, besides his victories at Olympia, had 8 victories
in the Isthmian games, and seven in the Nemean. It is said that he
also won in the Pythian games without a contest. And he and Pisirodus
were entered in the games as Thurians, because they were driven from
Rhodes by faction and migrated to Thurii. But Dorieus returned to
Rhodes subsequently. And of all men he manifestly was most devoted to
the Lacedæmonian interests, for he fought against the Athenians with
a fleet he had himself equipped, till he was captured by the Athenian
triremes and taken prisoner to Athens. And the Athenians before Dorieus
was brought before them were very angry against him and used threats,
but when they came to the popular Assembly and saw there so great and
renowned a man a captive, their intention about him changed and they
let him go, and did no harm to him, while they might have done so
with justice. The circumstances of the death of Dorieus are told by
Androtion in his history of Attica, _viz._ that the fleet of the great
king was at Caunus and Conon was the Admiral, and the people of Rhodes
were persuaded by Conon to revolt from the Lacedæmonians, and join the
alliance of the Athenians and the great king, and that Dorieus was at
the time absent from Rhodes in the interior of the Peloponnese, and was
arrested by the Lacedæmonians and taken to Sparta, and condemned by the
Lacedæmonians for treason and put to death. And if Androtion’s account
be correct, he seems to be desirous of proving the Lacedæmonians as
rash as the Athenians, for the Athenians are charged with acting rashly
with respect to Thrasyllus and those who fought under him at Arginusæ.
To such a pitch of glory then did Diagoras and his posterity attain.

  Alcænetus, the son of Theantus of Lepreus, and his sons also had
victories at Olympia. Alcænetus himself won prizes for boxing among
the men as previously among the boys. And Hellanicus and Theantus, the
sons of Alcænetus, were proclaimed winners in the boxing match for
boys, Hellanicus in the 89th Olympiad, and Theantus in the following
Olympiad. All three have statues at Olympia. And next to the sons of
Alcænetus are statues of Gnatho, the Dipæan from the country about
Mænalus, and Lycinus of Elis: who also had prizes for boxing among the
boys at Olympia. That Gnatho, when he conquered, was exceptionally
young is stated in the inscription, his statue is by Callicles the
Megarian. And Dromeus from Stymphelus was as his name indicates a
runner in the long course, and had two victories at Olympia, two at
the Pythian games, three at the Isthmus, and five at Nemea. It is said
also that he introduced eating flesh during training: for athletes in
training before him used to eat only a particular kind of cheese. His
statue is by Pythagoras, and the next to it is that of Pythocles of
Elis, who won in the pentathlum, by Polycletus.




CHAPTER VIII.


Who made the statue of Socrates of Pellene, who won the race for boys,
is not recorded, but the statue of Amertus of Elis, who defeated in
wrestling all the men that came to the Pythian games, was by Phradmon
the Argive. And Euanoridas of Elis won victories in wrestling among the
boys both at Olympia and at Nemea: and he became an Umpire and made a
list of the victors at Olympia.

  As to the boxer Damarchus, a Parrhasian from Arcadia, I cannot
credit, except the victory at Olympia, all the fictions about him
made by boastful people, such as that he changed from a man into a
wolf at the sacrifice of Zeus Lycæus, and that 10 years afterwards he
changed into a man again. Not that this is the tradition apparently
of the Arcadians about him. Else it would have been inserted in their
inscription at Olympia, which runs as follows.

  “Damarchus the son of Dinnytas erected this statue, a Parrhasian from
Arcadia.”

  This is all the inscription. But Eubotas of Cyrene, as he had learnt
beforehand from the oracle at Libya that he would gain the prize in
the race at Olympia, had his statue made first, and on the same day
was proclaimed victor and set up his statue. It is said also that he
won the chariot race in that Olympiad which the people of Elis do not
reckon because the Arcadians instituted the games.

  And the statue of Timanthes of Cleonæ, who won the prize for men in
the pancratium, is by the Athenian Myro, and that of Baucis of Trœzen,
who beat all the men in wrestling, is by Naucydes. The following
was they say the end of Timanthes. When he ceased to be an athlete
he continued none the less to make trial of his strength, every day
bending a huge bow: and he went away from home for a time, and during
that period the use of the bow was suspended: and when on his return
he found himself no longer strong enough to bend his bow, he lighted
his funeral pyre and put himself alive on it. All actions of this kind
whether in the past or in the future seem to me rather madness than
bravery.

  And next to Baucis are some statues of Arcadian athletes, as
Euthymenes of Mænalus, who won prizes among men for wrestling and still
earlier among boys, and Philip the son of Azan from Pellene, who beat
all the boys in boxing, and Critodamus from Clitor, who was himself
also proclaimed victor in the boys’ boxing match. That of Euthymenes
was by Alypus, that of Critodamus by Cleon, and that of Philip the son
of Azan by Myro. As to Promachus the pancratiast, the son of Dryon of
Pellene, I shall state more about him in my account of Achaia. And not
far from Promachus is the statue of Timasitheus of Delphi, (by Ageladas
the Argive), who won two victories in the pancratium at Olympia, and
three in the Pythian games. He also exhibited brilliant bravery in
war, and had constant good fortune till then. For his valour on that
occasion cost him his life. For when Isagoras the Athenian occupied the
Acropolis with the view of making himself master of Athens, Timasitheus
joined him, and was one of those who were captured, and put to death by
the Athenians for his share in the matter.




CHAPTER IX.


And the statue of Theognetus of Ægina, who was crowned for wrestling
among the boys, is by Ptolichus of Ægina, the pupil of his father
Synnoon, who was himself the pupil of Aristocles of Sicyon, the brother
of Canachus and as famous as a statuary. But why Theognetus carries
in his hand the fruit of the cultivated pine and pomegranate I cannot
conjecture, perhaps among some of the Æginetans there is some national
legend about him. And next to the statue of the man who the people of
Elis say was not registered with the rest, because he was proclaimed
victor in the trotting-race,[78] is the statue of Xenocles of Mænalus,
who beat all the boys in wrestling, and Alcetus the son of Alcinous,
who beat all the boys in boxing, an Arcadian from Clitor. His statue
is by Cleon, and Xenocles’ by Polycletus. And the statue of the Argive
Aristeus, who won the prize in the long course, is by the Chian
Pantias, a pupil of his father Sostratus: and next to him is the statue
of Chimon, the father of Aristeus, who won the prize for wrestling.
His statues are in my opinion the finest works of art of Naucydes,
one is at Olympia, and the other was carried from Argos to the temple
of Peace in Rome. It is also said that Chimon beat Taurosthenes of
Ægina in wrestling, and that in the following Olympiad Taurosthenes
beat all comers in wrestling, and the same day an apparition very like
Taurosthenes appeared at Ægina and announced his victory. And the
statue of Philles of Elis, who beat all the boys in wrestling, is by
the Spartan Cratinus. As to the chariot of Gelon, I cannot agree with
the opinion of those who have written before me, who say that it was a
votive offering of Gelon the tyrant of Syracuse. The inscription says
that it was a votive offering of Gelon of Gela, the son of Dinomenes,
who was a victor in the 73rd Olympiad. But Gelon the tyrant of Sicily
was master of Syracuse when Hybilides was Archon at Athens, in the
second year of the 72nd Olympiad, in which Tisicrates of Croton won
the race in the stadium. Manifestly therefore he would have been
entered for the race as a Syracusan, and not as a native of Gela. So
this Gelon would be some private person, having merely the same name as
the Tyrant. And Glaucias the Æginetan made both the chariot and statue
of Gelon.

  In the Olympiad previous to this they say that Cleomedes of
Astypalæa, boxing with Iccus from Epidaurus, killed him, and was
condemned by the Umpires to be deprived of his prize, and went out
of his mind for grief, and returned to Astypalæa, and standing in a
school when there were about 60 scholars pulled away the pillar which
supported the roof, and when the roof fell in on the boys he was
pelted with stones by the citizens, and fled for refuge to the temple
of Athene: and getting into a chest which was lying in the temple,
and clapping down the lid, the people of Astypalæa had immense labour
to open the chest. At last they broke open the woodwork, and found
no Cleomedes either alive or dead, and sent messengers to Delphi to
inquire what had become of him. The Pythian Priestess they say returned
this answer,

  “Last of the heroes is Cleomedes of Astypalæa, honour him with
sacrifices as no longer a mortal.”

  From that time forward the people of Astypalæa pay honours to him as
a hero.

  And next to the chariot of Gelon is the statue of Philo by the
Æginetan Glaucias. On this Philo Simonides, the son of Leoprepes, wrote
the very apt elegiac couplet:

  “My country is Corcyra, my name Philo. I am the son of Glaucus, and
have won prizes for boxing in two Olympiads.”

  There is also a statue of the Mantinean Agametor, who beat all the
boys in boxing.




CHAPTER X.


And next to those I have mentioned is Glaucus of Carystus, who they say
was originally from Anthedon in Bœotia, and traced his descent from
Glaucus the god of the sea. He was the son of Demylus, and they say
originally was a husbandman. And once when the ploughshare came off
his plough, he put it on again using his hand instead of a hammer. And
Demylus marvelled at his son’s strength, and in consequence sent him to
Olympia as a boxer. And there Glaucus, being unpractised in that kind
of contest, was badly handled by his antagonists, and, while boxing
with the last remaining of them, seemed likely to faint away from his
punishment. And they say his father cried out, _My boy, remember the
ploughshare_. Then he put in a terrible blow at his antagonist, and won
the prize. He is said also to have been twice crowned at the Pythian
games, and eight times in the Nemean and Isthmian games. The statue of
Glaucus was erected by his son, but was made by Glaucias the Æginetan.
And the statue is in the attitude of one boxing, for Glaucus was the
most clever of all his contemporaries in the noble Science. And after
his death the people of Carystus say that he was buried in the island
still called Glaucus’ island.

  And Damaretus of Heræa, and the son and grandson of Damaretus, had
two victories each at Olympia, Damaretus in the 65th Olympiad, when
first the race in heavy armour was instituted, and also in the next
Olympiad. His statue has a shield like those in use in our day, and a
helmet on the head, and greaves on the feet. This race in heavy armour
was abandoned eventually by the people of Elis and all the Greeks. And
Theopompus, the son of Damaretus, and afterwards his grandson of the
same name won the prize in the pentathlum, and the grandson Theopompus
won prizes also for wrestling; who made his statue we do not know,
but the statues of his father and grandfather were according to the
inscription by the Argives Eutelidas and Chrysothemis. It does not
however state from whom they learnt their art. This is the inscription.

  “The Argives Eutelidas and Chrysothemis made these statues, having
learnt their art from former generations.”

  And Iccus the son of Nicolaidas the Tarentine won the prize at
Olympia in the pentathlum, and afterwards became the best trainer of
his day. And next to Iccus is the statue of Pantarces of Elis, who
beat all the boys in wrestling, and was beloved by Phidias. And next
to Pantarces is the chariot of Cleosthenes, a man of Epidamnus, by
Ageladas, behind the Zeus erected by the Greeks after the battle of
Platæa. He conquered in the 66th Olympiad, and he erected not only his
own statue but also that of his charioteer and horses. And the names
inscribed on the horses are Phœnix and Corax, and of those in the
traces, on the right Cnacias, and on the left Samos. And there is this
elegiac couplet on the chariot:

  “Cleosthenes the Pontian from Epidamnus erected me, after winning the
prize with his horses in the noble contest of Zeus.”

  And of all that reared horses among the Greeks this Cleosthenes was
the first that erected his statue at Olympia. For the votive offering
of Euagoras the Lacedæmonian is only his chariot, and not Euagoras in
it: and as to Miltiades the Athenian, what he erected at Olympia I
shall narrate elsewhere. And the Epidamnians have the same territory
as formerly, but the town in our days is not the old one, but one at a
little distance: and its name is now Dyrrhachium from its founder.

  And there is a statue of Lycinus, the native of Heræa who won in the
race for boys, by Cleon, and of three who won victories among the boys
for boxing, Epicradius of Mantinea by Ptolichus of Ægina, and Tellon
the Oresthasian by what statuary is not on record, and Agiadas of Elis
by Serambus of Ægina.




CHAPTER XI.


Next to these are votive offerings of the people of Elis, as Philip
the son of Amyntas, and Alexander the son of Philip, and Seleucus, and
Antigonus; the statues of all but Antigonus are on horseback, he alone
is on foot.

  And not far from these kings is a statue of Theagenes of Thasos, the
son of Timosthenes. But the Thasians say that he was not the son of
Timosthenes, who was a priest of Hercules at Thasos, but that Hercules
disguised as Timosthenes had an intrigue with the mother of Theagenes.
And when the lad was nine years of age, and was going home from school,
he fancied they say the brazen statue of one of the gods in the
market-place, and seized it and put it upon one of his shoulders and
took it home. And the citizens being angry with him for what he had
done, a man of repute and advanced age would not let them kill the lad,
but bade him restore the statue back to its place, and he did so. And
immediately the fame of the lad for strength spread abroad, and his
exploit was talked of all over Greece. The most notable of his exploits
at Olympia I have already recorded, and how he beat Euthymus in boxing,
and how he was fined by the people of Elis. At that time Dromeus of
Mantinea won the victory in the pancratium, for the first time on
record without a contest. But he was beaten by Theagenes the Olympiad
afterwards in the pancratium. And Theagenes had three victories in the
Pythian games for boxing, and 9 at Nemea and 10 at the Isthmus for the
pancratium and boxing together. And at Phthia in Thessaly he neglected
boxing and the pancratium, and endeavoured to become illustrious among
the Greeks in racing, and beat all comers in the long course. I cannot
but think he was desirous of emulating Achilles, and to win in the
race in the country of the swiftest of heroes. All the crowns he won
were as many as 1400. And when he died, one of his enemies went up to
his statue every night, and scourged the brass as if it were Theagenes
alive he was maltreating. But at last the statue fell on him and killed
him and so stopped his outrage, but after his death his sons indicted
the statue for murder: and the Thasians threw the statue into the
sea, obeying the code of Draco, who in legislating for the Athenians
banished even inanimate things if they killed anyone by falling upon
him. But in process of time, as the earth yielded no fruit to the
Thasians, they sent envoys to Delphi, and the god bade them restore
from exile those that had been banished. Some were accordingly recalled
from exile, but the dearth was not removed. They went therefore a
second time to Delphi, saying that, though they had done what the
oracle ordered, yet the wrath of the gods remained. Then the Pythian
Priestess answered.

 “Your great Theagenes you have forgotten.”

And when they were quite in despair how to recover the statue of
Theagenes, some fishermen (they say) putting out to sea for the purpose
of catching fish caught the statue in their net and brought it to land.
And the Thasians restoring it to its original site sacrificed to it as
to a god. And I know that there are statues of Theagenes in various
parts of Greece and among the barbarians also, and that he is reckoned
to cure diseases, and has various honours from the people of Thasos.
His statue in Altis is by the Æginetan Glaucias.




CHAPTER XII.


And at no great distance is a brazen chariot and a man in it, and some
race-horses are on each side of it, and boys on the horses. They are
memorials of the victories in the Olympian contests of Hiero the son of
Dinomenes, the tyrant of Syracuse after his brother Gelon. They were
not however sent by Hiero, but Dinomenes the son of Hiero offered them
to the god. The chariot is by Onatas the Æginetan, and the horses on
both sides and the boys on them are by Calamis.

  And next to the chariot of Hiero is Hiero the son of Hierocles, of
the same name as the son of Dinomenes, and also himself tyrant of
Syracuse. This Hiero after the death of Agathocles, the former tyrant
of Syracuse, rose to the same power in the second year of the 126th
Olympiad, in which Idæus of Cyrene won in the stadium. This Hiero had
friendly relations with Pyrrhus the son of Æacides and became his
kinsman by marriage, Gelon his son marrying Nereis Pyrrhus’ daughter.
And when the Romans fought with the Carthaginians for the possession
of Sicily the Carthaginians had more than half the island, and on the
commencement of the war Hiero resolved to throw in his lot with the
Carthaginians, but in no long time thinking the Roman power stronger
and likely to be more lasting he joined them. He was assassinated by
Dinomenes, a Syracusan who had an especial hatred to tyranny, and who
afterwards endeavoured to kill Hippocrates the brother of Epicydes, who
had just come to Syracuse from Erbessus and was endeavouring to talk
over the people. But he defended himself, and some of his guards came
up and cut Dinomenes to pieces. And the statues of Hiero in Olympia,
one on horseback and the other on foot, were erected by his sons, and
made by the Syracusan Mico the son of Niceratus.

  And next to the statues of Hiero are Areus, the son of Acrotatus,
king of the Lacedæmonians, and Aratus the son of Clinias, and a second
one of Areus on horseback: that of Aratus is the votive offering of
the Corinthians, that of Areus of the men of Elis. Of both Aratus and
Areus I have given an account earlier in this work. Aratus was also
proclaimed victor at Olympia in the chariot-race. And Timon, the son of
Ægyptus, who entered horses at Olympia, a native of Elis, has a brazen
chariot, and on it a maiden who I think is Victory. And Callon the son
of Harmodius and Hippomachus the son of Moschion, both of Elis and
victors among boys in the boxing, have statues, Callon’s is by Daippus,
we do not know who designed Hippomachus’, but they say he wrestled down
three antagonists and received no blow or hurt. And the inscription on
the chariot states that Theochrestus of Cyrene, (who trained horses
according to the national custom of the Libyans), and his grandfather
also of the same name, had victories with their horses at Olympia, and
that the father of Theochrestus was victorious at the Isthmian games.
And that Agesarchus of Tritæa the son of Hæmostratus beat men in boxing
at the Olympian, Nemean, Pythian and Isthmian games is stated in an
elegiac couplet, which also states untruly, as I have discovered, that
the people of Tritæa are Arcadians. For of the towns that have attained
celebrity in Arcadia all about their founders is well known, and those
that were obscure from their origin, and lost their population through
their weakness, were absorbed into Megalopolis by a decree from the
commonalty of the Arcadians. Nor can we find any other Tritæa in Greece
but the one in Achaia. One would infer therefore that the people of
Tritæa were reckoned among the Arcadians, as now some of the Arcadians
are reckoned in Argolis. And the statue of Agesarchus is by the sons of
Polycles, of whom we shall make mention later on.




CHAPTER XIII.


And the statue of Astylus of Croton is by Pythagoras, he was victorious
at three Olympiads in succession in the stade and in the double course.
But because in the two latter Olympiads he entered himself as a
Syracusan, to ingratiate himself with Hiero the son of Dinomenes, the
people of Croton voted that his house should be turned into a public
prison, and removed his statue from the temple of Lacinian Hera.

  There is also at Olympia a pillar which recounts the victories of the
Lacedæmonian Chionis. They are simple who think that Chionis erected
this statue himself, and not the Lacedæmonian public. For granted that
there is on the pillar no mention of a race in heavy armour, how could
Chionis know that the people of Elis would not one day institute one?
They are still more simple who think that the statue on the pillar is
by Chionis, seeing it is by the Athenian Myro.

  Very similar fame to that of Chionis was won by the Lycian Hermogenes
Xanthius, who won the wild olive crown eight times in three Olympiads,
and was nicknamed _Horse_ by the Greeks. Polites too you would hold
in great admiration. He was from Ceramus in Caria, and manifested
great swiftness of foot at Olympia. For he won the longest race in the
shortest time on record, and on the same day he won the long race, and
the race in the stadium, and the double race. And on the second day,
when they only allow four chosen by lot to compete in the race and not
all comers, and the victors in each department only contend for these
prizes, Polites was victor again: for the person who is crowned for the
race in the stadium will go off with two victories. However the most
remarkable victories in the race were won by Leonidas of Rhodes, for in
four Olympiads he was in his prime, and 12 times conqueror through his
swiftness of foot. And not far from the pillar of Chionis at Olympia is
the statue of Scæus the Samian, the son of Duris, who beat all the boys
in boxing, his statue is by Hippias, and the inscription on it states,
that Scæus was victor when the Samian populace fled from their island,
and the statue was put up when they were restored. And next to the
tyrant is a statue of Diallus the son of Pollis, a native of Smyrna,
and the inscription states that he was the first Ionian that won the
prize in the pancratium for boys. And the statues of Thersilochus
of Corcyra, and Aristion of Epidaurus, the son of Theophiles, the
latter victor in boxing among men, the former among boys, are by the
Argive Polycletus. And the statue of Bycelus, who was the first of
the Sicyonians to conquer among boys in boxing, is by the Sicyonian
Canachus, who was a pupil of the Argive Polycletus. And next to Bycelus
is the hoplite Mnaseas of Cyrene, surnamed Libyan, by Pythagoras of
Rhegium. And the inscription on Agemachus of Cyzicus states that he
came to Argos from the mainland of Asia Minor. As to Naxos in Sicily,
which was colonized by some of the Chalcidians near the Euripus, there
are no ruins even of the town in our day, and that its name has come
down to posterity is mainly due to Tisander the son of Cleocritus.
For 4 times he beat all the men in boxing at Olympia, and had as many
victories in the Pythian games. There was not at that time any record
of the victors in the Corinthian games, nor did the Argives keep any
record of the victors in the Nemean games.

  And the mare of the Corinthian Phidolas, which was called as the
Corinthians inform us _Aura_, though its rider fell off at the
beginning of the race, yet ran straight and turned at the goal, and
when it heard the sound of the trumpet ran on all the faster, and beat
all the other horses by the decision of the Umpires, and knew that
it had come in first, and stopped running. And the people of Elis
proclaimed Phidolas victor, and allowed him to set up a statue of this
mare. The sons of Phidolas also won victories on a race-horse, and a
statue of the horse was put on a pillar with the following inscription.

  “Once in the Isthmian games, twice at Olympia, did Lycus the swift
courser win the race, and honour for the sons of Phidolas.”

  However this inscription and the records in Elis of the victors at
Olympia do not tally, for in the 68th Olympiad only do those records
record any victory of the sons of Phidolas. Let anyone inquire into
this further who likes. And there are statues of Agathinus the son of
Thrasybulus, and Telemachus who was victorious with his horses, the
former was an offering of the Achæans of Pellene. The Athenian people
also set up a statue to Aristophon the son of Lycinus who beat all the
men in the pancratium at Olympia.




CHAPTER XIV.


And Pherias the Æginetan, whose statue is next the Athenian Aristophon,
was not allowed in the 78th Olympiad to enter the contest because
he appeared very young, and was not thought fit to compete in the
wrestling, but the following year he was allowed to wrestle among the
boys and won the prize. A different fortune to this of Pherias was that
of Nicasylus the Rhodian at Olympia. For being 18 he was not allowed
to contend with the boys by the people of Elis, but was entered as a
man and won the prize. He was proclaimed victor also at the Nemean and
Isthmian games. But he died in his 20th year, before he could return
home to Rhodes. But the feat of this Rhodian wrestler at Olympia was
outdone in my opinion by Artemidorus of Tralles. He was unsuccessful
at Olympia in his endeavour to win the pancratium among the boys, but
the reason of his failure was his excessive youth. For when the season
came for the contest which the Ionians have at Smyrna his strength had
become so great that he beat on the same day all his antagonists from
Olympia in the pancratium, and all the boys that they call unbearded,
and thirdly all the best of the men. And they say that he was cheered
on by the trainer in the contest with the boys, but that in the contest
with the men he was reviled by the pancratiast. And Artemidorus won
at Olympia the victory among men in the 212th Olympiad. And near the
statue of Nicasylus is a small brazen horse, the votive offering of
Crocon of Eretria when he won the victory with a race-horse, and near
this horse is an effigy of Telestas the Messenian, who beat all the
boys in boxing, by Silanion.

  And the statue of Milo the son of Diotimus is by Dameas, both natives
of Croton. This Milo had six prizes for wrestling at Olympia, one of
them among boys, and at Pythia six among men and one among boys. And
he came to Olympia to wrestle for the 7th time. But he could not beat
in wrestling Timasitheus, a citizen and quite young, as Timasitheus
would not contend with him at close quarters in the arena at all. And
Milo is said to have carried his own statue to Altis. There are also
traditions about Milo in reference to a pomegranate and a quoit. He
held a pomegranate so fast that nobody could get it from him, and yet
he did not hurt it. And on one occasion standing on an oiled quoit he
excited laughter among those who jostled him and tried to push him off
it. And several other things he did in display. He tied a cord round
his forehead as if it were a fillet or a crown, and holding his breath
and filling the veins of his head with blood he would snap the cord
by the strength of his veins. It is recorded also that he would place
against his side his right arm from the elbow to the shoulder, and
stretch out the hand, and turn his thumb up while the fingers remained
together, and no one could with any exertion move the little finger
from its place. And they say he was killed by wild beasts. For he
chanced in the country near Croton on a withered tree, in which some
wedges were driven to separate the wood, and he took it into his head
to keep the wood apart with his hands. And the wedges slipt out and
he was imprisoned in the tree, and became a prey to the wolves, which
prowl about in great numbers in that neighbourhood. Such was the end of
Milo.

  And Pyrrhus the son of Æacides having been king in Thesprotia in
Epirus, and having done many remarkable deeds, which I have described
in my account of Attica, Thrasybulus of Elis erected his statue in
Altis. And next to Pyrrhus is the statue of a little man with pipes in
his hand on a pillar. This man had a prize for his piping, the first
time such prizes were bestowed since the Argive Sacadas. Sacadas first
conquered in the games established by the Amphictyonians (when no prize
was given), and after that he won two prizes. And Pythocritus of Sicyon
won in six of the Pythian contests successively, being the only piper.
It is plain also at the contest at Olympia that he was piper six times
in the pentathlum. For all this he had a pillar at Olympia with the
inscription on it,

  “This is the memorial of Pythocritus, (the son of Callinicus), the
piper.”

  The Ætolians also erected a public statue to Cylon, who freed
the people of Elis from the tyranny of Aristotimus. And Gorgus the
Messenian, the son of Eucletus, who won the victory in the pentathlum
has a statue by the Bœotian Theron, and Damaretus, also a Messenian,
who beat all the boys in boxing has a statue by the Athenian Silanion.
And Anauchidas of Elis, the son of Philys, won a wrestling prize among
the boys and afterwards among the men. Who his statue is by we do not
know. And the statue of Anochus the Tarentine, the son of Adamatas,
who won the victory both in the stadium and in the double course, is
by Ageladas the Argive. And the boy seated on a horse and the man
standing by the horse are as the inscription says Xenombrotus of Cos
in Meropis, who was proclaimed victor in the horse-race, and Xenodicus
who was proclaimed victor in the boxing matches for boys, the latter is
by Pantias, and the former by Philotimus of Ægina. And the two statues
of Pythes, the son of Andromachus, an Abderite, were made by Lysippus,
but his soldiers had them made. Pythes seems to have been a leader of
mercenaries, or in some other way to have shewn himself a good soldier.

  Here are also statues of those who won prizes in the course for boys,
as Meneptolemus from Apollonia on the Ionian gulf, and Philo from
Corcyra, and Hieronymus from Andros, who beat Tisamenus of Elis in the
pentathlum at Olympia, that Tisamenus who was afterwards a prophet for
the Greeks against Mardonius and the Medes at Platæa. And next to the
statue of Hieronymus is the statue of a boy-wrestler also from Andros,
Procles the son of Lycastidas. Stomius made the statue of Hieronymus,
and Somis that of Procles. And Æschines of Elis had two victories in
the pentathlum, and has two statues.




CHAPTER XV.


And Archippus of Mitylene, who beat all comers at boxing, had according
to the Mitylenæans this further fame, that he was crowned at the
Olympian Pythian Nemean and Isthmian games when he was only 20. And
the statue of Xenon, the son of Calliteles, of Lepreus in Triphylia,
who beat all the boys in the stadium, was made by the Messenian
Pyrilampes; we do not know who made the statue of Clinomachus of Elis,
who was proclaimed victor in the pentathlum. And the inscription of
the Achæans on Pantarches’ statue states that he was a native of Elis;
he made peace between the Achæans and people of Elis, and all the
prisoners who were captured on both sides were let go mainly through
him. He won his victory on a race-horse, and there is a record of his
victory at Olympia. And the statue of Olidas of Elis was set up by the
Ætolians. And Charinus of Elis has a statue for the double course and
for a victory in heavy armour, and near him is Ageles the Chian, who
beat all the boys in boxing, by Theomnestus of Sardis.

  And the statue of Clitomachus the Theban was erected by Hermocrates
his father. His exploits were as follows. In the Isthmian games he beat
all comers in wrestling, and on one day won prizes from all competitors
in boxing and in the pancratium. And all his 3 victories in the
Pythian games were in the pancratium. And at Olympia he was proclaimed
second to Theagenes of Thasos in the pancratium and in boxing. And in
the 141st Olympiad he won the prize in the pancratium. And the next
Olympiad found him a competitor in the pancratium and in boxing, and
Caprus of Elis was on the same day anxious to compete in the pancratium
and in wrestling. And when Caprus had won the wrestling-prize,
Clitomachus hinted to the umpires that it was only fair to call for the
pancratium before he was battered about by boxing. What he said seemed
reasonable, and when the pancratium was called on he was beaten by
Caprus, though he exhibited afterwards in the boxing a stout heart and
untired body.

  And the Ionians of Erythræ erected a statue to Epitherses the son of
Metrodorus, who won two victories in boxing at Olympia, and two at each
of the Pythian Nemean and Isthmian games, and the Syracusan public
erected two statues to Hiero, and his sons erected a third. As I stated
a little above this Hiero had the same name as the son of Dinomenes,
and was like him Tyrant of Syracuse. And the inhabitants of Pale, one
of the four tribes in Cephallenia, set up a statue to Timoptolis of
Elis the son of Lampis. These people of Pale were originally called
Dulichii. There is also a statue of Archidamus the son of Agesilaus,
and a man like a hunter. And the statues of Demetrius, who led an army
against Seleucus and was taken prisoner in the battle, and of Antigonus
the son of Demetrius, were let any one know votive offerings of the
Byzantians. And the Spartan Eutelidas had two victories for wrestling
among the boys in the 308th Olympiad, and a third in the pentathlum: at
that time the boys were called on first, and last in the pentathlum.
And there is an ancient statue of Eutelidas, the writing on the base is
obscure through lapse of time. And next to Eutelidas is another one of
Areus, the king of the Lacedæmonians, and next him Gorgus of Elis, who
is the only man up to my day who had four victories at Olympia in the
pentathlum, and one victory for the double course, and one for the race
in heavy armour.

  And the person by whom some boys are standing is they say Ptolemy the
son of Lagus, and next him are two statues of Caprus of Elis, the son
of Pythagoras, who won on the same day for the first time on record
prizes for wrestling and the pancratium. I have already shown how
successful he was against Clitomachus in the pancratium, and he beat in
wrestling Pæanius of Elis, who had carried off the prize for wrestling
in former Olympiads, and had been crowned in the Pythian games on the
same day for boxing among boys, and for wrestling and boxing among men.




CHAPTER XVI.


Caprus won his victories not without great effort and mighty energy:
and Anauchidas and Pherenicus, who were natives of Elis, had statues at
Olympia, and won prizes for wrestling among the boys. And the Thespians
erected the statue of Plistænus, the son of Eurydamus, who was the
general of the Ætolians against the Galati. And Tydeus of Elis erected
statues to Antigonus, the father of Demetrius, and to Seleucus. And
the name of Seleucus was noised abroad among all men on other accounts
but chiefly for his capture of Demetrius. And Timon won victories in
the pentathlum in all the Greek games but the Isthmian (for like all
the other men of Elis he was shut out of competition in them), and
the inscription on his statue mentions this further particular about
him, that he took part in the expedition of the Ætolians against the
Thessalians, and out of friendship to the Ætolians was leader of the
garrison at Naupactus. And not far from the statue of Timon are statues
of Greece and Elis in juxtaposition: Greece with one hand crowning
Antigonus, the Regent for Philip the son of Demetrius, and with the
other Philip himself; and Elis crowning Demetrius, who marched against
Seleucus, and Ptolemy the son of Lagus.

  And the inscription on his statue states that Aristides of Elis won
a victory in heavy armour at Olympia, and in the double course in the
Pythian games, and as a boy in the horse-race at Nemea. The length of
the horse-race is twice the double course. This race, which had fallen
into desuetude at the Nemean and Isthmian games, was restored by the
Emperor Adrian to the Argives at the winter games at Nemea.

  And next to the statue of Aristides is Menalcas of Elis, who was
proclaimed victor at Olympia in the pentathlum, and Philonides the
son of Zotus, who was from the Cretan Chersonese, and the courier of
Alexander the son of Philip. And next is Brimias of Elis, who beat
all the men in boxing, and the statue of Leonidas from Naxos in the
Ægæan, the votive offering of the Psophidian Arcadians, and the statue
of Asamon who beat all the men in boxing, and that of Nicander, who
had two victories at Olympia in the double course, and six at Nemea
for racing generally. Asamon and Nicander were both natives of Elis,
and the statue of the latter was by Daippus, that of the former by
the Messenian Pyrilampes. There are statues also to Eualcidas of Elis
and Seleadas the Lacedæmonian, the former was victor among the boys
in boxing, the latter in wrestling among the men. Here too is the
small chariot of the Lacedæmonian Polypithes, and on the same pillar
Calliteles (the father of Polypithes) the wrestler, who won victories
by his wrestling, as Polypithes by his horses. And the statues of some
private individuals of Elis, as Lampus the son of Arniscus, and the
son of Aristarchus, were erected by the Psophidian Arcadians, either
because they were their Consuls, or were otherwise friendly to them.
And between them is Lysippus of Elis, who beat all boys who contended
with him in wrestling, his statue is by Andreas the Argive.

  And the Lacedæmonian Dinosthenes won a victory over men at Olympia
in the course, and set up a pillar in Altis next to his statue: the
distance from this pillar by road to another pillar at Lacedæmon is 660
stades. And Theodorus, who was victor in the pentathlum, and Pyttalus,
the son of Lampis, who beat all the boys in boxing, and Nicolaidas, who
carried off the victory in the course and in the race in heavy armour,
were let any one know natives of Elis. As to Pyttalus they record
still further that, when there was a dispute between the Arcadians and
the men of Elis about their borders, he was made the arbitrator. His
statue is by the Olynthian Sthennis. And next is a statue of Ptolemy on
horseback, and by him the athlete of Elis Pæanius the son of Demetrius,
who won one prize for wrestling at Olympia, and two in the Pythian
games. There too is Clearetus of Elis, who won in the pentathlum, and
the chariot of the Athenian Glaucon (the son of Eteocles), who was
proclaimed victor in the chariot race with a full-grown horse.




CHAPTER XVII.


What I have just mentioned are the most notable things as you approach
Altis, but, if you go on the right from the monument of Leonidas to
the great altar, you will behold the following memorable objects.
There are statues of Democrates of Tenedos and Criannius of Elis, the
latter victor in the contest in heavy armour, the former in wrestling
among men. The statue of Democrates is by the Milesian Dionysicles,
that of Criannius by the Macedonian Lysus. And the Clazomenian
Herodotus, and the Coan Philinus, the son of Hegepolis, have statues
erected to them by their native cities, to Herodotus because he was
the first Clazomenian pronounced victor (his victory was among boys in
the course), and to Philinus because of his renown, for he had five
victories in running at Olympia, and four in the Pythian games, four
in the Nemean, and eleven in the Isthmian. And the statue of Ptolemy,
the son of Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, was the offering of Aristolaus a
Macedonian. There is also a statue of a boxer who was victorious over
boys, Butas the Milesian, the son of Polynices, and Callicrates from
Magnesia near the river Lethæus, who won two victories in the race
in heavy armour. His statue is by Lysippus. And there are statues of
Emaution and Alexibius, the former victor in the course for boys, the
latter in the pentathlum. Heræa in Arcadia was the native place of
Alexibius and his statue is by Acestor, where Emaution came from the
inscription does not state, it only declares he was an Arcadian. And
the Colophonians Hermesianax the son of Agoneus, and Icasius the son of
Lycinus by the daughter of Hermesianax, beat all the boys in wrestling,
and Hermesianax had his statue erected by the Colophonian community.

  Next to these are natives of Elis that beat all the boys in boxing,
Chœrilus by the Olynthian Sthennis, and Theotimus by the Sicyonian
Dætondas. Theotimus was the son of Moschion, who joined Alexander
the son of Philip in his expedition against Darius and the Persians.
And next are two from Elis again, Archidamus who conquered in the
four-horse-race, and Eperastus (the son of Theogonus) who was victor
in the race in heavy armour. And Eperastus states that he was a seer,
and descended from the family of the Clytidæ, at the close of the
inscription on his statue.

  “I boast to be a seer of the family of the holy-mouthed Clytidæ, of
the blood of the godlike descendants of Melampus.”

  Mantius was the father of Œcles, and the son of Melampus the son of
Amythaon. And Clytius was the son of Alcmæon, the son of Amphiaraus
the son of Œcles. And Alcmæon was father of Clytius by the daughter of
Phegeus, and he changed his residence to Elis, objecting to live with
his mother’s brothers, because he knew that they had contrived the
murder of Alcmæon.

  And there are some statues interspersed among some not very
remarkable votive offerings, as Alexinicus of Elis (by the Sicyonian
Cantharus), who won a wrestling prize among the boys, and Gorgias
of Leontini, whose statue was placed at Olympia by Eumolpus,
great-grandson of Deicrates who had married Gorgias’ sister. So
Eumolpus himself tells us. This Gorgias was the son of Carmantides, and
is said to have been the first to have practised Rhetoric, which had
been altogether neglected and nearly come into desuetude among men. And
they say Gorgias was famous for his eloquence at the public festival at
Olympia, and went with Tisias on an embassy to the Athenians. Tisias
too contributed something to oratory, and most plausibly did he plead
in the case of a Syracusan woman touching some money, but Gorgias
had still greater fame among the Athenians, and Jason the tyrant in
Thessaly put him above Polycrates, who had the highest renown in the
schools at Athens. And they say Gorgias lived 105 years. And the town
of Leontini, which was dispeopled by the Syracusans, was in my day
colonized again.




CHAPTER XVIII.


And there is the brazen chariot of Cratisthenes of Cyrene, and Victory
and Cratisthenes on the chariot. Plainly then he won his victory in the
chariot race. There is a tradition also that he was the son of Mnaseas
the runner, who was surnamed by the Greeks Libyan. And these votive
offerings to him at Olympia are by Pythagoras of Rhegium.

  Here too I found the statue of Anaximenes, who wrote a History of
all Antiquities in Greece, and of the exploits of Philip the son of
Amyntas, and afterwards of Alexander. This honour in Olympia he owed to
the people of Lampsacus: for the following is recorded about him. He
got round Alexander, who was by no means a mild king but excessively
passionate, by the following contrivance. The people of Lampsacus
having espoused the cause of the king of the Persians, or being thought
to have done so by Alexander, he boiled over in anger against them and
threatened them with the most condign chastisement. And they in all
haste sent Anaximenes to supplicate for their wives and children and
country, as he had been well known to Alexander and earlier still to
Philip. And Anaximenes went to Alexander, who had learnt the motive
of his errand, and had sworn they say by all the gods that he would
do exactly contrary to what he entreated. Then Anaximenes said, “O
King oblige me with this favour, enslave the women and children at
Lampsacus, and raze the whole town to its foundations, and burn the
temples of the gods.” This is what he said, and Alexander having no
contrivance to meet his cunning, and being compelled by his oath, very
unwillingly pardoned the people of Lampsacus. Anaximenes seems also
to have known how to punish an enemy very cleverly and exemplarily.
He was naturally a sophist and a very good imitator of the arguments
of the sophists. And having a quarrel with Theopompus, the son of
Damasistratus, he wrote a book full of abuse against the Athenians
and Lacedæmonians and Thebans. And as he had imitated his style very
accurately, and put the name of Theopompus on the title page, and
distributed the book about in various towns, though he himself was
really the writer, general odium was stirred up throughout Greece
against Theopompus. Nor did any one earlier than Anaximenes practise
extempore oratory. But I cannot think that he was author of the verses
about Alexander that run in his name.

  And Sotades, (who was proclaimed a Cretan, as indeed he was), won
the prize in the long course in the 99th Olympiad, but in the next
Olympiad, being bribed by the Ephesian people, he registered himself as
an Ephesian, and the Cretans exiled him for it.

  And the first athletes who had effigies at Olympia were Praxidamas
the Æginetan, who won the prize for boxing in the 59th Olympiad, and
the Opuntian Rhexibius, who won the prize in the pancratium in the 61st
Olympiad. And their effigies are made of wood, Rhexibius’ of figwood,
and the Æginetan’s of cypress. This last has suffered less than the
other.




CHAPTER XIX.


And there is in Altis a base of tufa stone to the North of the temple
of Hera, at its back is the mountain of Cronos. On this base are
treasuries such as some of the Greeks have made for Apollo at Delphi.
There is a treasury at Olympia called the treasury of the Sicyonians,
the votive offering of Myron the King of the Sicyonians. It was
constructed by Myron after his chariot victory in the 33rd Olympiad.
In this treasury he constructed two chambers, one of Doric the other
of Ionic architecture. I myself have seen them: they are of brass: but
whether the brass comes from Tartessus, according to the tradition of
the people of Elis, I do not know. The river Tartessus is they say in
the country of the Iberes, and has two outlets to the sea, and there
is a town of the same name that lies between the outlets of the river.
And it is the largest river in Iberia, and in later times was called
Bætis from its ebb and flow. And the Iberes who inhabit the town of
Carpia believe that their town was originally called Tartessus. And
on the smaller of the two chambers at Olympia there are inscriptions,
one on the lintel stating that there are 500 talents there, another
as to the givers of the votive offering, stating that they were Myron
and the people of the Sicyonians. In this treasury there are three
quoits, which they use in the contest for the pentathlum. And there
is a brazen shield curiously painted inside, and helmet and greaves
to match. And there is an inscription on this armour that they are an
offering to Zeus from the Myanes. As to who these Myanes were different
people have different ideas. I remember that Thucydides in his account
of the Locrians near Phocis mentions several towns, among others the
Myones.[79] These Myanes on the shield are in my opinion the same as
the Myones in the Locrian mainland: and the letters on the shield are
a little worn away, in consequence of its great antiquity. There are
also here several other curious articles, as the sword of Pelops with
golden hilt, and the horn of Amalthea in ivory, the votive offering
of Miltiades the son of Cimon, who was the first of his family that
reigned in the Thracian Chersonese: and this is the inscription on the
horn in old Athenian letters,

  “I was offered to Zeus by the warriors that took the fort of Aratus
on the Chersonese: their leader was Miltiades.”

  There is also a statue of Apollo made of boxwood with the head gilt:
the inscription states that it was a votive offering of the Locrians
at the promontory of Zephyrium, and by Patrocles of Croton, the son of
Catillus.

  And next to the treasury of the Sicyonians is that of the
Carthaginians, constructed by Pothæus and Antiphilus and Megacles.
And the votive offerings in it are a huge Zeus and three linen
breastplates, presented by Gelon and the Syracusans who beat the
Phœnicians either on land or sea.

  And the third and fourth treasuries are the votive offering of the
people of Epidamnus. They contain the world upheld by Atlas, and
Hercules and the apple tree in the garden of the Hesperides with the
dragon coiled round it, carved in cedar-wood, the carving of Theocles
(the son of Hegylus) who says his son joined him in the carving of
the world. And the Hesperides, which were removed by the people of
Elis, were in my time in the temple of Hera. And Pyrrhus and his sons
Lacrates and Hermon made this treasury for the people of Epidamnus.

  The people of Sybaris also built a treasury next to that of the
people of Byzantium. Those who have inquired most carefully into the
history of Italy and its towns say that Lupiæ, which lies between
Brundisium and Hydrus, has changed its name, and was originally called
Sybaris. And the haven for ships was made by navvies in the reign of
the Emperor Adrian.

  And next to the treasury of the people of Sybaris is the treasury
of the Libyans at Cyrene, containing statues of the Roman kings. The
Carthaginians expelled the Selinuntian Siceliotes in war, but before
that disaster happened to them, they had got together the treasury for
Zeus at Olympia. Dionysus is there with his face toes and hands of
ivory.

  And in the treasury of the people of Metapontum, which is next to
that of the Selinuntians, is a statue of Endymion, all ivory but the
dress. The cause of the ruin of Metapontum I do not know, but in my
time nothing but the theatre and walls round the town was left. The
Megarians also near Attica have a treasury and votive offerings in
it, figures in cedar overlaid with gold, to represent the battle of
Hercules and Achelous. There are Zeus and Deianira and Achelous and
Hercules, and Ares is helping Achelous. And Athene stands as if in
alliance with Hercules, near the Hesperides that are now in the temple
of Hera. And on a gable of this treasury is the war between the gods
and the giants: and over the gable is a shield, which states that the
Megarians offered the treasury, after triumphing over the Corinthians.
I think they won this victory when Phorbas was Archon at Athens, who
was Archon all his life, for the Archonship was not yet a yearly
office at Athens, nor were the Olympiads registered at this period
by the people of Elis. The Argives are also said to have assisted
the Megarians against the Corinthians. This treasury at Olympia was
constructed by the Megarians some years after the battle. But the
votive offerings they probably had from old time, since they were made
by the Lacedæmonian Dontas, the pupil of Dipœnus and Scyllis. And the
last of the treasuries is near the course, and the inscription on it
states that it and its statues are the votive offerings of the people
of Gela. The statues however are no longer there.




CHAPTER XX.


Cronos’ mountain is, as I have already said, behind the base, and
extends the length of these treasuries. And on the summit of the
mountain those that are called _Basilæ_ sacrifice to Cronos at the
vernal equinox in the month of Elaphius. And at the North end of Mount
Cronos there is between the treasuries and the mountain a temple of
Ilithyia, and in it is honoured Sosipolis the tutelary deity of the
people of Elis. Ilithyia they surname the Olympian, and select annually
a priestess for her: the old priestess of Sosipolis also performs holy
rites according to the custom of the people of Elis, brings lustral
water to the goddess, and sets before her cakes kneaded with honey.
In the vestibule of the temple is the altar of Ilithyia, as also
the approach to the temple for people generally: inside Sosipolis
is honoured, and no one but the priestess of the god must enter his
sanctuary, with a white veil drawn over her head and face. And the
maidens that reside in the temple of Ilithyia and the women sing
hymns to Sosipolis, and burn incense to him, but are not accustomed
to pour libations of wine to his honour. And their most binding oath
is by Sosipolis. And it is said that, when the Arcadians invaded Elis
with an army, and the people of Elis were drawn up in battle array
against them, a woman came to the generals of Elis, with a baby boy
at her breast, saying that she was mother of the boy, and offered him
according to a dream she had had to help the people of Elis. And the
authorities, crediting the woman’s tale, put the child in the front
of the army all naked as it was. And the Arcadians commenced the
attack, and the child was changed into a dragon, and the Arcadians
were troubled at the sight and began to flee, and the people of Elis
pursued them hotly, and won a notable victory and called the god
Sosipolis. And where the dragon appeared to glide off after the battle,
they built a temple, and resolved to worship it and Ilithyia jointly,
for they thought it was she who had introduced the child into the
world. And the Arcadians who were slain in the battle have a monument
on the hill towards the west after you have crossed the Cladeus. And
near Ilithyia there are ruins of a temple of celestial Aphrodite, to
whom they sacrifice on the altars which still remain.

  And inside Altis, at the processional entrance, is what is called
the Hippodamium, surrounded by a wall, occupying about an acre. This
is the entrance every year for the women, who sacrifice to Hippodamia
and perform other rites in her honour. They say Hippodamia fled to
Midea in Argolis, when Pelops was especially angry with her owing to
the death of Chrysippus: and they say that according to the oracle they
afterwards placed her remains at Olympia. And at the end of the statues
which they erected out of fines imposed on the athletes is the entrance
which they call Private. For by it the Umpires and combatants enter
the course. There is also an embankment, and seats for the managers of
the games. And opposite the Umpires is an altar of white stone, seated
on which the priestess of Demeter Chamyne watches the Olympian games,
an honour which different priestesses at different times have received
from the people of Elis, for they do not prevent maidens from seeing
the games. And at the starting-place is the tomb of Endymion, according
to the tradition of the people of Elis.

  And near the place where the Umpires sit is the ground appointed
for the horse-races and the starting-place, which is in shape like
the prow of a ship with its beak turned to the course. And the prow
is broad where it joins the Portico called Agnaptus. And there is a
brazen dolphin upon a bar at the extremity of the beak. Each side of
the starting-place is more than 400 feet in length, and there are some
buildings there, which those who enter for the horse-races get by lots.
And in front of the chariots and race-horses is extended a rope as a
sort of barrier. And there is an altar of unbaked brick erected near
the middle of the beak every Olympiad, whitewashed outside. And there
is a brazen eagle on this altar with its wings stretched out wide. When
the clerk of the course touches a piece of mechanism on this altar, the
eagle is so constructed as to mount aloft so as to be visible to the
spectators, while the dolphin falls to the ground. First the ropes on
each side of the Portico called Agnaptus are slackened, and the horses
in position there start first, and run on till they come to the horses
in the second position, and then the ropes there are slackened, and
so on along the whole course where the horses are in position, till
they can all start fair at the beak. Then commences the exhibition of
the skill of the charioteers and the swiftness of the horses. Cleœtas
originally contrived this method of starting, and plumed himself upon
his invention, as we find by the inscription on his statue at Athens,

  “I was made by Cleœtas the son of Aristocles, who invented at Olympia
the start for horses.”

  They say too that Aristides subsequently somewhat improved the
invention.

  But the other side of the Hippodrome is more extended, being also of
raised earth, and at its outlet is Taraxippus the terror of horses,
which is in the shape of a circular altar, and as the horses run past
it they are immediately seized with strong fear without any apparent
cause, and this fear generates terror, insomuch that chariots are often
smashed up, and the charioteers badly injured. And the charioteers
sacrifice to avoid this, and pray that Taraxippus will be propitious
to them. About Taraxippus the Greeks have various views; some say it
is the tomb of an Autochthon, famous for his skill with horses, whose
name was Olenius, and say that the rock Olenia in Elis was named after
him. Others say that Dameon the son of Phlius, an associate with
Hercules in the expedition against Augeas and the people of Elis, was
killed together with the horse on which he rode by Cteatus the son of
Actor, and that this is the joint tomb of Dameon and his horse. Others
say that Pelops erected here a cenotaph to Myrtilus, and sacrificed
to him to avert his anger for his murder, and named him Taraxippus,
because the horses of Œnomaus were disturbed by his contrivance. But
some say that Œnomaus himself hindered the horses in the course. And
I have heard the blame put upon Alcathous the son of Porthaon, who
was buried here after having been slain by Œnomaus as one of the
unsuccessful suitors of Hippodamia, and who, in consequence of his bad
success in the Hippodrome, has an evil eye and is a malevolent demon
to race-horses. But an Egyptian told me that Pelops received something
from Amphion and buried it on the spot called Taraxippus, and that in
consequence of what was buried there the horses of Œnomaus formerly,
and everybody’s horses since, have been terrified. This Egyptian also
thought that Amphion and the Thracian Orpheus were wonderful magicians,
and that by their charms wild beasts followed Orpheus, and stones
formed themselves into houses for Amphion. The most plausible account
however of Taraxippus seems to me that which makes it a surname of
Poseidon Hippius. There is also at the Isthmus a Taraxippus, Glaucus
the son of Sisyphus, who they say was killed by horses, when Acastus
was holding the funeral games to his father. And at Nemea in Argolis
there is no hero that terrifies horses, but there is a gleam like fire
from a red stone where the horses turn which frightens the horses. But
Taraxippus at Olympia is far the most formidable panic-inspirer in
horses. And at one of the goals there is a brazen statue of Hippodamia
with a fillet, about to bind Pelops with it for his victory.




CHAPTER XXI.


And the other part of the hippodrome is not an embankment, but a hill
of no great size, on the top of which is a temple built to Demeter
under the name of Chamyne. And some think that title of hers an ancient
one, and that the earth opened there and took in the chariot of Pluto,
and closed again. Others say that Chamynus of Pisa, (who opposed the
dominion in Pisa of Pantaleon, the son of Omphalion, and stirred the
people up to revolt from Elis), was slain by Pantaleon, and that it
was out of his property that the temple to Demeter was built. And in
lieu of the old ones new statues of Proserpine and Demeter were erected
in Pentelican marble by the Athenian Herodes. And in the gymnasium
at Olympia they practise for the pentathlum and the races. And in the
open air there is a basement of stone, and originally on the basement
there was a trophy for a victory over the Arcadians. On the left of
the entrance to the gymnasium there is a smaller enclosure where the
athletes practise wrestling. And at the Portico of the gymnasium
facing East are some buildings for the Athletes facing South and West.
And after you have crossed the river Cladeus you come to the tomb of
Œnomaus, a mound piled up with stones, and above the tomb are some
remains of buildings where they say the horses of Œnomaus were stabled.
And here are the boundaries towards Arcadia, which now belong to the
people of Elis, but formerly belonged to the people of Pisa.

  After you have crossed the river Erymanthus, near the ridge called
after Saurus, is the tomb of Saurus, and a temple of Hercules, ruins
of which are to be seen in our day. Saurus they say used to molest
wayfarers and the people of the country, till he was killed by
Hercules. From the south side of the ridge called after this robber a
river falls into the Alpheus nearly opposite Erymanthus. Its name is
Diagon, and it divides the district of Pisa from Arcadia. And 40 stades
onwards from the ridge of Saurus is the temple of Æsculapius, surnamed
Demænetus from the name of the builder. It is in ruins too, and is
built on the high ground along the Alpheus. And not far from it is the
temple of Dionysus Lucyanites, hard by the river Lucyanias, which rises
in Mount Pholoe, and flows into the Alpheus. When you have crossed the
Alpheus you are in the district of Pisa.

  Here you will see a hill with a steep acclivity, and on it are ruins
of the town of Phrixa, and a temple of Athene Cydonia, not in my time
in complete preservation, there is only an altar. They say Clymenus,
a descendant of Idæan Hercules, erected the temple to the goddess. He
came from Cydonia in Crete and from the river Iardanus. The people
of Elis say also that Pelops sacrificed to Athene Cydonia before his
race with Œnomaus. And as you advance a little further you come to the
river Parthenia, on whose banks the horses of Marmax are buried. The
story is that Marmax was the first suitor of Hippodamia, and that he
was slain before the rest by Œnomaus, and the names of his horses were
Parthenia and Eripha, and Œnomaus cut their throats and buried them
with their master, and the river Parthenia got its name from one of
them. There is also another river called Harpinates, and at no great
distance from it some remains of a town Harpina especially altars: they
say that Œnomaus built the town and gave it its name after his mother
Harpina.

  A little further is a lofty mound of earth, the tomb of the suitors
of Hippodamia, Œnomaus did not (they say) bury them in the ground near
one another as a mark of honour, but it was Pelops subsequently who
gave them a common sepulchre, in honour to them and out of affection to
Hippodamia, and I think also as a record to posterity how many worthy
gentlemen Œnomaus had slain before he Pelops vanquished him. Indeed
according to the poem called the Great Eœæ the following were killed
by Œnomaus, Alcathous the son of Porthaon next to Marmax, and next
to Alcathous Euryalus and Eurymachus and Crotalus. Their parents and
native lands I could not ascertain. But Acrias, who was killed next,
one would infer to have been a Lacedæmonian and the founder of Acriæ.
And next to Acrias Œnomaus slew Capetus and Lycurgus and Lasius and
Chalcodon and Tricolonus, who the Arcadians say was a descendant as
well as namesake of Tricolonus the son of Lycaon. And after Tricolonus
fate overtook in this fatal race Aristomachus and Prias and Pelagon and
Æolius and Cronius. Some also add to the list I have given Erythras,
the son of Leucon and grandson of Athamas, who gave his name to the
town in Bœotia called Erythræ, and Eioneus, the son of Magnes and
grandson of Æolus. Here then is the tomb of all these, and they say
Pelops offered them funeral rites every year when he was king of Pisa.




CHAPTER XXII.


And if you go about a stade forward from this tomb there are traces of
a temple of Artemis surnamed Cordace, because the attendants of Pelops
used to offer their sacrifices to the goddess there, and dance the
national dance of Sipylus called the _cordax_. And not far from the
temple is a building not very large, and in it is a brazen coffer, in
which are deposited the remains of Pelops. And there is no vestige of a
wall or any other building, but vines are planted all over the site on
which Pisa was built. The founder of the town was they say Pisus, the
son of Perieres and grandson of Æolus. And the people of Pisa brought
on their own misfortunes by making themselves objectionable to the
people of Elis, and by their desire to start the Olympian games instead
of the people of Elis, and in the 8th Olympiad they invited Phido the
Argive, the most haughty of all the Greek tyrants, and made him the
patron of the games. And in the 34th Olympiad the people of Pisa and
their king Pantaleon, the son of Omphalion, assembled together the
neighbouring people, and instituted the Olympian games instead of the
people of Elis. During these Olympiads, and also in the 104th Olympiad
which was set on foot by the Arcadians, the people of Elis kept no
register, nor do they include them in the Olympiads. And in the 48th
Olympiad Damophon the son of Pantaleon gave the people of Elis reason
to suspect that he intended to act treacherously against them, so they
invaded Pisæa, but did not at this time do any damage, because they
returned home again being persuaded by entreaties and promises. But
when Pyrrhus the son of Pantaleon succeeded his brother Damophon on the
throne, then the people of Pisa of their own accord commenced war with
the people of Elis. And the people of Macistus and Scillus in Triphylia
joined them in their revolt from the people of Elis, and of the other
neighbouring people the Dyspontii, whose relations had always been very
friendly with the people of Pisa, and whose founder Dysponteus was they
state the son of Œnomaus. And the people of Elis eventually razed Pisa
to the ground and all the towns that had assisted her in the war.

  The ruins of Pylos in Elis are visible as you go over the mountains
from Olympia to Elis. And from Pylos to Elis is 80 stades’ distance.
This Pylos was built, as I have already mentioned, by the Megarian
Pylon the son of Cleson. And being destroyed by Hercules, and once
again peopled by the people of Elis, it was destined once more to
lack inhabitants. Near it the river Ladon flows into the Peneus. And
the people of Elis say that it is about this Pylos that the lines of
Homer[80] are.

  “He derived his origin from the river Alpheus, which flows in broad
volume through the territory of Pylos.”

  And they persuaded me by what they said, for the Alpheus flows
through this district, and the lines cannot refer to the other Pylos.
For by the Pylos near the island Sphacteria the Alpheus does not flow
at all, nor do we know of any town in Arcadia formerly called Pylos.
And about 50 stades from Olympia is the village belonging to Elis
called Heraclea, and near it is the river Cytherus. There is a well
that flows into the river, and there is a temple to the Nymphs by the
well. And the proper names of these Nymphs individually are Calliphæa
and Synallaxis and Pegæa and Iasis, and collectively Ionides. And
people bathing in this well get cured from pains and aches of all
kinds. And they say the Nymphs got their name Ionides from Ion, the son
of Gargettus, who migrated to this place from Athens.

  But if you wish to go to Elis through the plain, it is 120 stades
to Letrini, and 180 from Letrini to Elis. Letrini was a small town
originally founded by Letreus the son of Pelops, but now there are
only a few buildings, and a temple and statue of Alphean Artemis. They
give the following legend to account for the goddess being called
Alphean. Alpheus they say was deeply in love with her, and when he
found he could not marry her for all his wooing and vows, he had the
boldness to try and force her, and went to a nightly revel at Letrini,
which was to be held by her and the Nymphs with whom she associated
in sport: and she, suspecting his plot, smeared with mud her own face
and the faces of all the Nymphs present, and so Alpheus when he got
there could not distinguish her from the Nymphs, and accordingly had to
depart without effecting his object. So the people of Letrini called
the goddess Alphean from Alpheus’ passion for her. And the people of
Elis, for they had an ancient friendship for the people of Letrini, say
that they borrowed their worship of the Elaphiæan Artemis from them,
and used to perform rites to her as Alphea, but in process of time the
name Elaphiæa prevailed. But in my opinion the people of Elis called
Artemis Elaphiæa from her love of hunting deer: but their own tradition
is that Elaphius was the name of a woman who was Artemis’ nurse. And
about six stades beyond Letrini is a perennial lake about three stades
in diameter.




CHAPTER XXIII.


And the notable things in Elis are an old gymnasium, in which before
they go to Olympia the athletes go through all the customary training.
There are some lofty plane-trees inside a wall growing all along the
course, and the whole enclosure is called Colonnade, because Hercules
the son of Amphitryon used to exercise there, and all the thorns and
weeds that grew there were plucked up every day. There is a course
called by the people of the place sacred, set apart for the races,
and there is another course where they practise for the races and the
pentathlum. There is also in the gymnasium a place called Plethrium,
where the Umpires pit the athletes together according to their ages or
difference in their training, and put them to wrestling to test their
capacities. And there are in the gymnasium altars to some of the gods,
as Idæan Hercules under the title of Champion, and Eros, and the god
whom the Athenians and people of Elis alike call Anteros, and Demeter
and Proserpine. There is no altar to Achilles, but he has a cenotaph
in accordance with an oracle. And at the commencement of the general
festival on a given day, when the sun begins to set, the women of Elis
among other rites in honour of Achilles are wont to wail and strike the
breast.

  And there is another enclosure, smaller than the gymnasium but
adjacent to it, which they call from its shape the Square. And here
the athletes practise their wrestling, and here they test the athletes
who are past wrestling, sometimes even applying blows with mild whips.
And one of the statues is erected here, which were made of Zeus out
of the fine-money of Sosander of Smyrna and Polyctor of Elis. There
is also a third enclosure used as a gymnasium, which is called Maltho
from the softness of its floor, and this is given up to the lads all
the time the general festival lasts. And in a corner of Maltho there
is a statue of Hercules, merely the head and shoulders, and in one
of the wrestling-places is a figure of Eros and Anteros, Eros has a
branch of palm which Anteros is trying to take away. And on each side
of the entrance to Maltho is the statue of a boy-boxer, and the Custos
Rotulorum at Elis says that it is a native of Alexandria above the
island Pharos, called Serapion, who came to Elis and gave the people
food when they were short of corn. That was why he received these
honours: and the date when he received the crown at Olympia, and did
this kindness to the people at Elis, was the 217th Olympiad. In this
gymnasium the people of Elis also have a council chamber, where they
practise extempore rhetoric, and submit all kinds of writings to public
criticism: it is called Lalichmium from the name of its originator.
And round it are some shields hung up, well worth seeing, not made for
purposes of war, but simply for ornament.

  You go from the gymnasium to the baths by the street called Silence
near the temple of Artemis the Lover of Youths. The goddess was so
called from her proximity to the gymnasium. And the street was called
Silence from the following circumstance. Some men in the army of Oxylus
being sent forward to reconnoitre Elis, and having cheered one another
on the road, when they got near the walls, passed round the word for
silence, and to listen if they could hear any sound within the town,
and so stole into the town without being observed by this street, and
returned again to Ætolia after having got the wished for intelligence.
And the street received its name from the silence of these spies.




CHAPTER XXIV.


Another way out of the gymnasium leads to the market-place, and to what
is called the Umpires’ Hall beyond the tomb of Achilles, and it is by
this way that the Umpires are accustomed to enter the gymnasium. And
they enter the gymnasium to pit together the runners before the sun
gets too powerful, and at noon they call the competitors together for
the pentathlum and the arduous contests.

  And the market-place at Elis is not like that of the Ionians, or of
the Greek cities in Ionia, but is built after a more antique type,
with porticoes and streets at regular intervals. And the name of the
market-place in our day is Hippodrome, and there the people of the
place exercise their horses. The architecture of the portico facing
South is Doric, and it is divided into 3 portions by pillars: it is
there that the Umpires mostly spend the day. And there are altars
erected to Zeus, and several other altars in the open air in the
market-place, and they are easily removed as they are only improvised
altars. And at the end of this portico, on the left as you go to the
market-place, is the Umpires’ Hall, and a street separates it from the
market-place. In this Umpires’ Hall those who are chosen as Umpires
live ten months together, and are instructed by the Custodes Rotulorum
in all things that appertain to the games. And near the portico where
the Umpires spend the day is another portico, called the Corcyræan,
and a street runs between the two porticoes. It was so called because
when the Corcyræans invaded Elis in their ships, the people of Elis
they say drove them off and took much booty from them, and built their
portico with a tenth of the spoil. And the architecture of the portico
is Doric: it has a double row of pillars, one towards the market-place,
the other in the opposite direction. In the middle are no pillars,
but a wall supports the roof, and there are statues on either side
of this wall. And at the end of the portico near the market-place is
a statue of Pyrrho the son of the Sophist Pistocrates, who had great
persuasiveness on any topic. Pyrrho’s tomb is at no great distance from
Elis, at a place called Petra, an old hamlet according to tradition.
And the people of Elis have in the open air near the market-place a
most noble temple and statue of Apollo the Healer. This would probably
be much the same title as his Athenian title of Averter of Evil.[81]
And on another side are stone statues to the Sun and Moon, she has
horns on her head, he has his beams. There is also a temple to the
Graces, and their wooden statues, their dresses gilt, and their heads
hands and feet of white marble, and one of them holds a rose, the
second dice, and the third a small branch of myrtle. The meaning of
which things we may conjecture thus. The rose and myrtle are sacred to
Aphrodite, and have a place in the legend of Adonis, and the Graces
have most intimate connection with Aphrodite: and dice are playthings
of striplings and maidens, who have not yet lost all grace through
old age. And on the right of the Graces is a statue of Eros on the
same pedestal. There is also there a temple of Silenus, dedicated to
Silenus alone, and not in common to him and Dionysus, and Drunkenness
is filling his cup. That the Sileni are mortal we should infer from
their tombs, for there is the tomb of one Silenus in the country of
the Hebrews, and of another at Pergamum.[82] And in the market-place
the people of Elis have the following remarkable thing, which I have
myself seen, in the shape of a temple. It is no great height, and has
no walls, and the roof is supported by pillars made of oak. The people
of the country say that it is a monument, but whose they do not record,
but if the account of the old man whom I asked be correct, it would be
the monument of Oxylus. There is also in the market-place a room for
the 16 matrons, where they weave the shawl for Hera.[83]




CHAPTER XXV.


And next the market-place is an ancient temple, a colonnade with
pillars all round. The roof is fallen in with age, and there is no
statue remaining. It was dedicated to the Roman Emperors.

  And behind the Corcyræan Portico is a temple of Aphrodite, and a
grove in the open air sacred to her, not far from the temple. The
statue of the goddess in the temple is called Celestial Aphrodite, and
is by Phidias in ivory and gold, she has one foot on a tortoise. Her
grove is surrounded by a wall, and inside the grove is a basement on
which is a brazen statue by Scopas of the Pandemian Aphrodite sitting
on a brazen he-goat. The meaning of the tortoise and he-goat I leave my
readers to guess.

  And the sacred precincts and temple of Pluto (for the people of Elis
have both) are opened once every year, but no one may enter them even
then but the sacrificing priest. And as far as we know the men of Elis
are the only ones that honour Pluto, for the following reason. When
Hercules led an army against Pylos in Elis they say Athene cooperated
with him. Then it was that Pluto came and helped the people of Pylos
out of hostility to Hercules, and was accordingly honoured at Pylos.
And they cite as their witness Homer’s lines in the Iliad.[84]

  “Mighty Pluto also endured the swift arrow, when this man, the son of
Ægis-bearing Zeus, wounded him at Pylos, and gave him pain among the
dead.”

  Nor if in the expedition of Agamemnon and Menelaus against Ilium
Poseidon, according to the tradition of Homer, helped the Greeks,
was it against probability that Pluto should have helped the people
of Pylos in the opinion of the same poet. Anyway the people of Elis
erected this temple to Pluto as being friendly to them and hostile to
Hercules. And once every year they are accustomed to open the temple to
indicate, I think, that men once descend to Pluto’s gloomy realm. The
people of Elis have also a temple to Fortune, and in the portico of
this temple is a huge statue of wood, gilt all over except the head the
hands and the toes, which are of white marble. Here too Sosipolis is
honoured on the left of Fortune, in a rather small shrine: represented,
according to the appearance of him seen in a dream, as a boy with a
particoloured cloak on covered with stars, and in one of his hands the
horn of Amalthea.

  And in that part of the town where the people of Elis have most of
their population, there is a statue not larger than life of a beardless
man, who has his feet crossed, and leans against his spear with both
his hands, his dress is of wool and linen and flax. This statue is said
to be of Poseidon, and was worshipped of old at Samicum in Triphylia.
And it was honoured even still more when removed to Elis, and they give
it the name of Satrapes and not Poseidon, having learnt this name from
their neighbours at Patræ. And Satrapes is the surname of Corybas.




CHAPTER XXVI.


And the old theatre between the market-place and the temple of the
goddess Mene is the theatre and temple of Dionysus, the statue of the
god is by Praxiteles. And of all the gods the people of Elis honour
Dionysus most, and say that he frequents their festival in his honour
called the Thyia, a festival which they celebrate about 8 stades from
the city. The priests deposit 3 empty flagons in the chapel, in the
presence of the citizens and strangers who may chance to be at the
feast, and the priests themselves or any others who like seal the doors
of the chapel. And the next day they come to the chapel to observe the
miracle, and on entering find the flagons full of wine. Those held in
the highest repute at Elis, and strangers as well, have sworn that this
is as I have said, I was not myself there at the time of the festival.
The people of Andros also say that annually at the feast of Dionysus
wine flows spontaneously from the temple. If one can believe the
Greeks in this matter, one might equally credit the tradition of the
Ethiopians beyond Syene as to the Table of the Sun.

  And in the citadel at Elis is a temple of Athene, her statue is of
ivory and gold, and said to be by Phidias, and on her helmet is a cock,
because that bird is said to be most pugnacious, or perhaps because it
is sacred to Athene the Worker.

  And about 120 stades from Elis is Cyllene, which faces Sicily, and is
a fine harbour for ships. The dockyard belongs to the people of Elis
but got its name from an Arcadian. Homer has not mentioned Cyllene in
his Catalogue of the people of Elis, but subsequently in the Iliad
shews that he knew that there was such a town as Cyllene.

  “And Polydamas killed Otus of Cyllene, the companion of Phyleides,
the leader of the brave Epeans.”[85]

  The gods who have temples in Cyllene are Æsculapius and Aphrodite.
Hermes also has an Ithyphallic statue, which the natives pay
extravagant honour to.

  The country of Elis is fertile in fruits of all kinds but especially
in flax. As to hemp and flax all sow them whose land is favourable to
their growth. But the threads which the Seres make their garments of
are not from any plant, but are produced in the following manner. There
is an insect on the earth which the Greeks called Ser, but the Seres
give it another name. Its size is about double that of the largest
beetle, and in other respects it is like the spiders that weave their
webs under trees, and has also 8 feet like spiders. These insects the
Seres breed, and put summer and winter into little domiciles specially
constructed for them. And what these insects produce is a slender
thread, which rolls round their feet. For 4 years they feed them on
grain, and in the fifth year (for they know they will not live longer)
they give them green reed to eat. This food is the most agreeable of
all to this insect, and when it has taken its fill of this it bursts
from repletion. And when it is dead they find the thread in its inside.
It is well-known that the island Seria is in the Red Sea. But I have
heard that it is not the Red Sea, but a river called the Ser that makes
this island, just as in Egypt the Delta is formed by the Nile and not
by sea. Such a kind of island is Seria. The Seres are of Ethiopian
race, and so are those that inhabit the neighbouring islands Abasa and
Sacæa. Some however say that they are not Ethiopians but a cross-breed
of Scythians and Indians. Such are the various traditions.

  As you go from Elis to Achaia it is about 127 stades to the river
Larisus, which is in our day the boundary between Elis and Achaia, but
in ancient times the boundary was the promontory Araxus near the sea.




FOOTNOTES:

[76] This proverb means _to play fast and loose_, _to be a turn-coat_,
_a Vicar of Bray_. The best illustration is Cicero _ad Fam._ vii. 29.
“Noli hanc epistolam Attico ostendere: sine eum errare et putare me
virum bonum esse nec solere duo parietes de eadem fidelia dealbare.”
See also Erasmus’ _Adagia_.

[77] The passage referred to is Iliad, vi. 407.

[78] See Book v., ch. 9.

[79] Thucyd. iii. 101.

[80] Iliad, v. 544, 545.

[81] See Book i. ch. 3.

[82] One might also infer the same from the fate of Marsyas.

[83] See Book v. ch. 16.

[84] v. 395-397.

[85] Iliad, xv. 518, 519.




INDEX

(_The number in Roman Notation is the number of the Book, the number in
Arabic Notation the number of the Chapter._)

  Achelous, a river in Ætolia, iv. 34; viii. 24. Its contest with
    Hercules, iii. 18; vi. 19. Father of Callirhoe, viii. 24, of the
    Sirens, ix. 34, of Castalia, x. 8.

  Acheron, a river in Thesprotia, i. 17; v. 14; x. 28.

  Achilles, i. 22; iii. 18, 19, 24.

  Acichorius, a general of the Galati, x. 19, 22, 23.

  Acrisius, son of Abas, ii. 16. Husband of Eurydice, iii. 13.
    Constructs a brazen chamber for his daughter Danae, ii. 23; x. 5.
    Killed unintentionally by his grandson Perseus, ii. 16.

  Actæa, the ancient name of Attica, i. 2.

  Actæon, son of Aristæus, ix. 2; x. 17, 30.

  Addison, ii. 20, Note.

  Adonis, ii. 20; ix. 29.

  Adrian, the Roman Emperor, i. 3, 18, 44; ii. 3, 17; vi. 16, 19; viii.
    8, 10, 11, 22. His love for, and deification of, Antinous, viii. 9.

  Adriatic sea, viii. 54.

  Adultery, iv. 20; ix. 36.

  Ægialus, afterwards Achaia, v. 1; vii. 1, where see Note.

  Ægina, the daughter of Asopus, ii. 5, 29; v. 22; x. 13.

  Ægina, the island, ii. 29, 30.

  Ægisthus, i. 22; ii. 16, 18.

  Ægos-potamoi, iii. 8, 11, 17, 18; iv. 17; ix. 32; x. 9.

  Æneas, the son of Anchises, ii. 21, 23; iii. 22; v. 22; viii. 12; x.
    17, 26.

  Æschylus, the son of Euphorion, i. 2, 14, 21, 28; ii. 13, 20, 24;
    viii. 6, 37; ix. 22; x. 4.

  Æsculapius, the son of Apollo, ii. 10, 26, 27, 29; iii. 23; vii. 23;
    viii. 25. His temples, i. 21; ii. 10, 13, 23; iii. 22, 26; iv. 30,
    31; vii. 21, 23, 27; viii. 25.

  Æsymnetes, vii. 19, 20.

  Æthra, wife of Phalanthus, her love for her husband, x. 10.

  Ætna, its craters, how prophetic, iii. 23. Eruption of Ætna, x. 28.

  Agamemnon, i. 43; ii. 6, 18; iii. 9; vii. 24; ix. 40. His tomb, ii.
    16; iii. 19.

  Ageladas, an Argive statuary, iv. 33; vi. 8, 10, 14; vii. 24; viii.
    42; x. 10.

  Aglaus of Psophis, happy all his life, viii. 24.

  Ajax, the son of Oileus, his violation of Cassandra, i. 15; x. 26, 31.

  Ajax, the son of Telamon, i. 5, 35; v. 19.

  Alcæus, vii. 20; x. 8.

  Alcamenes, a statuary, a contemporary of Phidias, i. 8, 19, 20, 24;
    ii. 30; v. 10; viii. 9; ix. 11.

  Alcmæon, son of Amphiaraus, the murderer of his mother Eriphyle, i.
    34; v. 17; viii. 24.

  Alcman, the poet, i. 41; iii. 18, 26.

  Alcmena, the daughter of Amphiaraus and Eriphyle, and wife of
    Amphitryon, deceived by Zeus, v. 18. Hated by Hera, ix. 11. Mother
    of Hercules, v. 14.

  Alcyone, the daughter of Atlas, ii. 30; iii. 18; ix. 22.

  Alexander, son of Alexander the Great by Roxana, i. 6; ix. 7.

  Alexander the Great, i. 9; v. 21; vii. 5; ix. 23, 25. Said by the
    Macedonians to be the son of Ammon, iv. 14. Very passionate, vi.
    18. Tradition about his death, viii. 18. Buried at Memphis, i. 6.
    His corpse removed thence by Ptolemy, i. 7. Statues of him, i. 9;
    v. 25; vi. 11. Cassander’s hatred of him, ix. 7.

  Alexandria, v. 21; viii. 33.

  Alpheus, a river in Pisa, iii. 8; v. 7; vi. 22. Enamoured of Artemis,
    vi. 22; of Arethusa, v. 7. Women may not cross the Alpheus on
    certain days, v. 6. Leucippus lets his hair grow to the Alpheus,
    viii. 20.

  Altars, v. 13, 14; vi. 20, 24; ix. 3, 11.

  Althæa, daughter of Thestius and mother of Meleager, viii. 45; x. 31.

  Altis (a corruption of ἄλσος, grove), v. 10, 11, 14, 15, 27.

  Amaltheæ cornu, iv. 30; vi. 19, 25; vii. 26. (Cornu copiæ.)

  Amazons, i. 15, 41; iii. 25; iv. 31; vi. 2.

  Amber, native and otherwise, v. 12.

  Ambraciotes, v. 23; x. 18.

  Ammon, iii. 18, 21; iv. 14, 23; v. 15; vi. 8; viii. 11, 32; ix. 16;
    x. 13.

  Amphiaraus, i. 34; ii. 13, 23; ix. 8, 19.

  Amphictyones, vii. 24; x. 2, 8, 15, 19.

  Amphion and Zethus, sons of Antiope, ii. 6; ix. 5, 17; x. 32.

  Amphion, ii. 21; vi. 20; ix. 5, 8, 16, 17.

  Anacharsis, i. 22.

  Anacreon of Teos, a friend of Polycrates, i. 2. The first erotic poet
    after Sappho, i. 25.

  Anaximenes, his ruse with Alexander the Great, &c., vi. 18.

  Ancæus, the son of Lycurgus, viii. 4, 45.

  Androgeos, i. 1, 27.

  Andromache, the wife of Hector, x. 25.

  Androtion, vi. 7; x. 8.

  Angelion and Tectæus, statuaries and pupils of Dipœnus and Scyllis,
    ii. 32; ix. 35.

  Antæus, ix. 11.

  Antalcidas, Peace of, ix. 1, 13.

  Antenor, x. 26, 27.

  Anteros, i. 30; vi. 23.

  Anticlea, the mother of Odysseus, x. 29.

  Anticyra, famous for hellebore, originally called Cyparissus, x. 36.

  Antigone, ix. 25.

  Antimachus, the poet, viii. 25; ix. 35.

  Antinous, viii. 9. See also Adrian.

  Antioch, the capital of Syria, viii. 29.

  Antiochus, the pilot of Alcibiades, iii. 17; ix. 32.

  Antiope, the Amazon, i. 2, 41.

  Antiope, the mother of Zethus and Amphion, i. 38; ii. 6; ix. 17, 25;
    x. 32.

  Antiphanes, an Argive statuary, v. 17; x. 9.

  Antipœnus, heroism of his daughters Androclea and Alcis, ix. 17.

  Antonine, the Emperor, called by the Romans Pius, viii. 43. His son
    and successor Antonine, viii. 43.

  Anytus, one of the Titans, viii. 37.

  Aphidna, i. 17, 41; ii. 22; iii. 17, 18.

  Aphrodite, Anadyomene, ii. 1; v. 11. Mother of Priapus, according to
    the people of Lampsacus, ix. 31. The tutelary saint of the men of
    Cnidus, i. 1. Ancient temple of her and Adonis in common in Cyprus,
    ix. 41. Her clients, ii. 34; ix. 38. Her statue by Dædalus, ix.
    40. The myrtle in connection with her, vi. 24. The Celestial and
    Pandemian Aphrodite, vi. 25; ix. 16. (The Latin _Venus_.)

  Apis, the Egyptian god, i. 18; vii. 22.

  Apollo, helps Alcathous, i. 42. Herds the cattle of Laomedon, vii.
    20. Inventor of the lute, iii. 24; v. 14; viii. 31. Jealous of
    Leucippus, viii. 20. Jealous of Linus, ix. 29. His altar in common
    with Hermes, v. 14. See also Delphi.

  Aratus of Soli, i. 2.

  Aratus of Sicyon, ii. 8, 9; viii. 10, 52.

  Ardalus, the son of Hephaæstus, inventor of the flute, ii. 31.

  Ares, the Latin _Mars_, charged with murder, i. 21, 28.

  Areopagus, i. 28; iv. 5.

  Arethusa, v. 7; vii. 24; viii. 53.

  Argiope, a Nymph, mother of Thamyris by Philammon, iv. 33.

  Argo, the famous ship, vii. 26; ix. 32.

  Argonauts, vii. 4.

  Argos, ii. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24; vii. 17.

  Ariadne, i. 20, 22; x. 29.

  Aricia, the people of, their tradition about Hippolytus, ii. 27.

  Arimaspians, i. 24, 31.

  Arion, the horse, viii. 25.

  Arion and the dolphin, iii. 25.

  Aristocrates, viii. 5, 13. Heredity in vice and punishment.

  Aristodemus, king of the Messenians, iv. 8, 10, 13, 26.

  Aristogiton, i. 8, 29.

  Aristomache, the daughter of Priam, x. 26.

  Aristomenes, the hero of Messenia, iv. 6, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22,
    23, 24, 27, 32; vi. 7; viii. 14, 51.

  Aristo, the father of the famous Plato, iv. 32.

  Aristophanes on Lepreus, v. 5.

  Aristotle, the mighty Stagirite, his statue, vi. 4.

  Arsinoe, daughter of Ptolemy, and wife of her own brother, i. 7, 8;
    ix. 31.

  Arsinoites, name of a district in Egypt, v. 21.

  Art, the noble art of self-defence, vi. 10; viii. 40.

  Artemis, (the Latin _Diana_,) iii. 22; iv. 30; viii. 3, 27.
    Especially worshipped at Hyampolis, x. 35. Temple of the goddess at
    Aulis, ix. 19. Events there, _do._

  Artemisia, her valour at Salamis, iii. 11.

  Artemisium, a mountain, ii. 25; viii. 5.

  Ascra, in Bœotia, the birthplace of Hesiod, ix. 29, 38.

  Asopus, a river in Bœotia, ii. 6. Reedy, v. 14.

  Asopus, a river in Sicyonia, ii. 5, 15.

  Asphodel, its unpleasant smell, x. 38.

  Atalanta, iii. 24; viii. 35, 45.

  Athamas, son of Æolus, vii. 3. Brother of Sisyphus, ix. 34. Desirous
    to kill his children Phrixus and Helle, ix. 34.

  Athene, (the Latin _Minerva_,) why grey-eyed, i. 14. Her birth, i.
    24. Disputes as to territory between her and Poseidon, i. 24;
    ii. 30. Gives Erichthonius to the daughters of Cecrops, i. 18. A
    colossal statue of the goddess at Thebes, ix. 11.

  Athens, sacred to Athene, i. 26. Captured by Sulla, i. 20.

  Athenians, very pious, i. 17, 24; x. 28. (Cf. Acts xvii. 22.) Helped
    in war by the gods, viii. 10. Their forces at Marathon and against
    the Galati, iv. 25; x. 20. Their expedition to Sicily, viii. 11;
    x. 11, 15. The only democracy that ever rose to greatness, iv. 35.
    Their magistrates, iii. 11; iv. 5, 15. Their townships, i. 3, 32,
    33. Their law-courts, i. 28. Their Eponymi, i. 5. Their expeditions
    beyond Greece, i. 29. Their heroes, x. 10.

  Athletes, their diet in training, vi. 7.

  Atlas, v. 11, 18; vi. 19; ix. 20.

  Atlas, a mountain in Libya, i. 33; viii. 43.

  Atreus, ii. 16, 18; ix. 40.

  Attalus, an ally of the Romans, vii. 8, 16. His greatest feat, i. 8.
    The oracle about him, x. 15.

  Attica, whence it got its name, i. 2. Sacred to Athene, i. 26.

  Augeas, v. 1, 3, 4, 8.

  Augustus, iii. 11, 21, 26; iv. 31; vii. 17, 18, 22; viii. 46. Statues
    of Augustus, ii. 17; v. 12.

  Aulis, iii. 9; viii. 28; ix. 19.

  Aurora, i. 3; iii. 18; v. 22.

  Axe tried in Court, i. 24, 28.


  Babylon, its walls, iv. 31.

  Bacchantes, ii. 2, 7.

  Bacchus, see Dionysus.

  Bacis, his oracles, iv. 27; ix. 17; x. 14, 32. A Bœotian, x. 12.

  Bacon, Francis, Viscount St. Albans, on revenge, iii. 15, Note.

  Bady, place and river, v. 3.

  Balsam tree, ix. 28.

  Banqueting-hall at Elis, v. 15.

  Barley cakes, mysterious property of, iii. 23.

  Baths, how taken in ancient times, x. 34. Women’s swimming-bath, iv.
    35. Warm baths, ii. 34; iv. 35; vii. 3.

  Bato, the charioteer of Amphiaraus, ii. 23.

  Bayle on _Hippomanes_, v. 27, Note.

  Beans, i. 37; viii. 15.

  Bear, the Great, viii. 3.

  Bears, i. 32; iii. 20; vii. 18.

  Bees of Hymettus, i. 32. Bees and Pindar, ix. 23. In connection with
    Trophonius, ix. 40. Temple fabled to have been built by them, x. 5.

  Bel, i. 16; viii. 33.

  Bellerophon, ii. 2, 4, 31; iii. 18; ix. 31.

  Bias of Priene, x. 24.

  Biblis, love-passages of, vii. 5.

  Bison, x. 13.

  Bito, see Cleobis.

  Blackbirds of Mt. Cyllene, viii. 17.

  Boar’s Memorial, iv. 15, 19.

  Bœotarchs, ix. 13, 14; x. 20.

  Bones, ii. 10; iii. 22.

  Booneta, iii. 12, 15.

  Bootes, viii. 3.

  Brasiæ, iii. 24, see Note.

  Brass, first brass-founders, viii. 14; x. 38.

  Brennus, x. 8, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

  Briareus, ii. 1, 4.

  Brigantes in Britain, viii. 43.

  Briseis, v. 24; x. 25.

  Britomartis, iii. 14; viii. 2.

  Bupalus, iv. 30; ix. 35.

  Buphagus, viii. 14, 27.

  Burial, ii. 7; ix. 32.

  Bustards, x. 34.

  Byzantium, walls of, iv. 31.


  Cabiri, i. 4; iv. 1; ix. 22, 25; x. 38.

  Cadmean victory, ix. 9.

  Cadmus, the son of Agenor, iii. 15; ix. 5, 12, 19.

  C. Julius Cæsar, ii. 1; iii. 11. His gardens, viii. 46.

  Calais and Zetes, iii. 18.

  Calamis, a famous statuary, master of Praxias, i 3, 23; ii. 10; v.
    25, 26; vi. 12; ix. 16, 20, 22; x. 16.

  Calchas, i. 43; vii. 3; ix. 19.

  Callicrates, vii. 10, 12.

  Callimachus, i. 26; ix. 2.

  Callion, barbarity of the Galati at, x. 22.

  Calliphon of Samos, v. 19; x. 26.

  Callirhoe and Coresus, tragic love story about, vii. 21.

  Callisto, the daughter of Lycaon, changed into a she-bear, i. 25;
    viii. 3.

  Callon, a statuary of Ægina, ii. 32; iii. 18; vii. 18.

  Calus, murder of by Dædalus, i. 21, 26.

  Calydonian boar, i. 27; iii. 18; viii. 45, 46, 47.

  Canachus, a statuary, ii. 10; vi. 9, 13; vii. 18; ix. 10; x. 9.

  Cantharus, a statuary, vi. 3, 17.

  Capaneus, the son of Hipponous, struck with lightning, ix. 8, see
    Note.

  Capua, the chief town in Campania, v. 12.

  Carcinus, a native of Naupactus, x. 38.

  Carpo, a Season, ix. 35.

  Carthage, rebuilt by Julius Cæsar, ii. 1.

  Carthaginians, i. 12; v. 25; vi. 19; x. 8, 17, 18.

  Cassandra, the daughter of Priam, violated by Ajax, i. 15; v. 19; x.
    26. Called _Alexandra_, iii. 19, 26.

  Castalia, x. 8.

  Castor and Pollux, see Dioscuri.

  Catana, filial piety at, x. 28.

  Caverns, notable ones, x. 32.

  Ceadas, iv. 18.

  Cecrops, son of Erechtheus, king of Athens, i. 5; vii. 1; viii. 2.

  Celeus, father of Triptolemus, i. 14, 38, 39; ii. 14.

  Centaur, v. 19. Fight between the Centaurs and the Lapithæ, i. 17; v.
    10.

  Cephalus and Aurora, i. 3; iii. 18.

  Cepheus, father of Andromeda, iv. 35.

  Cephisus, a river in Argolis, ii. 15, 20.

  Cephisus, a river in Attica, i. 37.

  Cephisus, a river in Eleusis, i. 38.

  Cephisus, a river in Bœotia, ix. 24, 38; x. 8, 33, 34.

  Ceramicus, i. 3; viii. 9.

  Cerberus, ii. 31, 35; iii. 25.

  Ceres, see Demeter.

  Cestus, viii. 40.

  Chæronea, fatal battle of, i. 18, 25; v. 20; ix. 6, 29, 40. (Milton’s
    “dishonest victory, fatal to liberty.”)

  Chaldæans, the first who taught the immortality of the soul, iv. 32.

  Champagny on Pausanias, see Title-page.

  Chaos first, ix. 27.

  Charon, x. 28. (Cf. Virgil’s “Jam senior, sed cruda deo viridisque
    senectus.”—_Æn._ vi. 304.)

  Chimæra, iii. 25.

  Chios, vii. 4.

  Chiron, a Centaur and tutor of Achilles, iii. 18; v. 5, 19.

  Chrysanthis, i. 14.

  Cicero, see Note to x. 35.

  Cimon, the son of Miltiades, ii. 29; viii. 52.

  Cinadus, the pilot of Menelaus, iii. 22.

  Cinæthon, the Lacedæmonian genealogist, ii. 3, 18; iv. 2; viii. 53.

  _Ciphos_, our _coif_, iii. 26.

  Cirrha, x. 1, 8, 37.

  Cists, used in the worship of Demeter and Proserpine, viii. 25, 37;
    x. 28.

  Cithæron, a mountain in Bœotia, i. 38; ix. 2.

  Clearchus, iii. 17; vi. 4.

  Cleobis and Bito, ii. 20, see Note.

  Cleombrotus, the son of Pausanias, king of Sparta, i. 13; iii. 5, 6;
    ix. 13.

  Cleomedes, vi. 9.

  Cleomenes, ii. 9.

  Cleon, statuary, v. 17, 21; vi. 1, 8, 9, 10.

  Clymene, reputed by some mother of Homer, x. 24.

  Clytæmnestra, ii. 16, 18, 22.

  Coats of mail, i. 21; vi. 19; x. 26.

  Coccus, x. 36.

  Cocytus, i. 17. (Cf. Virgil, _Æneid_, vi. 132, “Cocytusque sinu
    labens circumvenit atro,” and Horace, _Odes_, ii. 14-17, 18.)

  Colophon, vii. 3, 5; ix. 32.

  Colossuses, i. 18, 42. (If gentle reader objects to this plural let
    me cite Sir T. Herbert, “In that isle he also defaced an hundred
    other colossuses.”—_Travels_, p. 267.)

  Comætho, her love-passages with Melanippus, vii. 19.

  Commentaries of events, i. 12.

  Conon, son of Timotheus, i. 1, 2, 3, 24, 29; iii. 9; vi. 3, 7; viii.
    52.

  Cordax, a dance, vi. 22.

  Coresus, see Callirhoe.

  Corinna, ix. 20, 22.

  Corinth, taken by Mummius, ii. 1; vii. 16. Rebuilt by Julius Cæsar,
    ii. 1, 3; v. 1.

  Corœbus, the Argive, i. 43.

  Corpses, remarkable, v. 20, 27; viii. 29.

  Corsica, x. 17.

  Corybantes, iii. 24; viii. 37.

  Cos, island, iii. 23; vi. 14, 17; viii. 43.

  Cosmosandalum, ii. 35.

  Costoboci, x. 34.

  Creon, i. 3; ix. 5, 10.

  Cresphontes, son of Aristomachus, ii. 18; iv. 3, 5, 31; v. 3. Marries
    the daughter of Cypselus, iv. 3; viii. 5, 29.

  Crete, island of, iii. 2; vii. 2; viii. 38, 53. Cretan bowmen, i. 23;
    iv. 8; vii. 16.

  Crocodiles, i. 33; ii. 28; iv. 34.

  Crœsus, iii. 10; iv. 5; viii. 24.

  Cronos, (the Latin _Saturnus_,) i. 18; viii. 8, 36; ix. 2, 41; x. 24.

  Crotonians, their tradition about Helen, iii. 19. Milo a native of
    Croton, vi. 14. Wolves numerous in the neighbourhood of Croton, vi.
    14.

  Crowns in the games, viii. 48.

  Cuckoo and Hera, ii. 17.

  Curetes, iv. 31, 33; v. 7; viii. 2, 37; x. 38.

  Cybele, see the Dindymene Mother.

  Cyclades, islands, i. 1; v. 21, 23.

  Cyclopes, their buildings, ii. 16, 20, 25; vii. 25.

  Cycnus, a Celtic king, tradition about, i. 30.

  Cydias, his prowess against the Galati, x. 21.

  Cydnus, a river that flows through the district of Tarsus, a cold
    river, viii. 28.

  Cynoscephalæ, battle of, vii. 8.

  Cyprus, claims to be birth-place of Homer, x. 24.

  Cypselus, his chest, v. 17, 18, 19.


  Dædalus, the famous Athenian, son of Palamaon, why called Dædalus,
    ix. 3. A contemporary of Œdipus, x. 17. Fled to Crete, why, i. 21;
    vii. 4; viii. 53. His pupils, ii. 15; iii. 17; v. 25. His works of
    art, i. 27; ii. 4; viii. 16, 35, 46; ix. 11, 39.

  Dædalus of Sicyon, statuary also, vi. 2, 3, 6; x. 9.

  Damophon, the best Messenian statuary, iv. 31; vii. 23; viii. 31, 37.

  Danae, daughter of Acrisius and mother of Perseus, her brazen
    chamber, ii. 23; x. 5. (Horace’s “turris aenea.”)

  Danaus, how he became king of Argos, ii. 19. His daughters’
    savageness, ii. 16, 24; x. 10. How he got them second husbands,
    iii. 12.

  Daphne, and the crown of laurel in the Pythian games, x. 7.

  Darius, the son of Hystaspes, iii. 4, 9, 12; vii. 10.

  Decelea, iii. 8.

  Delium, i. 29; ix. 6, 20; x. 28.

  Delphi, x. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

  Delta, ii. 21; vi. 26.

  Demaratus, a seven-month child, iii. 4, 7.

  Demeter, (the Latin _Ceres_,) i. 14, 37, 39, 43; ii. 35; viii. 15,
    25, 42. See also Triptolemus.

  Demetrius, the son of Antigonus, i. 6, 10, 25, 36; ix. 7.

  Demo, the Sibyl of Cumæ, x. 12.

  Democracies, none in Greece in old times, ix. 1. No democracy that we
    know of but Athens ever rose to greatness, iv. 35. Remark on, i. 8.

  Demosthenes, the son of Alcisthenes, i. 13, 29.

  Demosthenes, the son of Demosthenes, i. 8; ii. 33.

  Despœna, viii. 37. See also Proserpine.

  Deucalion, his flood, i. 18, 40; v. 8; x. 6.

  Dicæarchia, iv. 35; viii. 7. (_Puteoli._)

  Dice, vi. 24; vii. 25; x. 30.

  Dindymene Mother, vii. 17, 20; viii. 46; ix. 25. (That is Cybele.)

  Diocles, ii. 14.

  Diomede, king of Thrace, iii. 18; v. 10.

  Diomede, who led the Argives to Troy, i. 11, 28; ii. 30, 32; x. 31.
    Runs off with the Palladium, i. 22.

  Dionysius, the tyrant, i. 2; vi. 2.

  Dionysus, (the Latin _Bacchus_,) father of Priapus, ix. 31. Son of
    Zeus by Semele, iii. 24. Fetches up Semele from Hades, ii. 31, 37.
    Punishes Antiope, ix. 17. Takes Ariadne from Theseus, x. 29. Many
    legends about him, x. 29. His orgies, x. 33; ii. 2, 7.

  DIOSCURI (_Castor and Pollux_), iii. 13, 26; iv. 31. Visit the house
    of Phormio, iii. 16. Their anger against the Messenians, iv. 16,
    26. Origin of their anger, iv. 27. Their particular kind of hats,
    iii. 24; iv. 27. Called Anactes, ii. 36; x. 38.

  Diotimus, the father of Milo, of Croton, vi. 14.

  Dipœnus and Scyllis, pupils of Dædalus, statuaries, ii. 15, 22, 32;
    iii. 17; v. 17; vi. 19; ix. 35.

  Dirce, the legend about her, ix. 17, 25.

  Divination, various modes of, iii. 23, 26; iv. 32; vi. 2; vii. 21,
    25; ix. 11.

  Dodona, i. 17; vii. 21, 25; viii. 11, 23, 28; ix. 25; x. 12.

  Dog, cure for bite of, viii. 19.

  Dolphin, i. 44; ii. 1; iii. 25; x. 13.

  Dontas, pupil of Dipœnus and Scyllis, vi. 19.

  Doric Architecture, v. 10, 16; vi. 24. Dorian measure, ix. 12.

  Doriclydas, pupil of Dipœnus and Scyllis, v. 17.

  Draco, the Athenian legislator, vi. 11; ix. 36.

  Dragon, viii. 8. Guards the apples of the Hesperides, vi. 19. One
    wonderfully killed, ix. 26. Seed of the dragon’s teeth, ix. 10.
    Dragons sacred to Æsculapius, ii. 11, 28. Also to Trophonius, ix.
    39. Yoked to the chariot of Triptolemus, vii. 18.

  Dreams, x. 2, 38. Interpreters of, i. 34; v. 23.

  Drunkenness personified, ii. 27; vi. 24.

  Dryads, viii. 4; x. 32.

  Dumb bells, v. 26; vi. 3.

  Dyrrhachium, formerly Epidamnus, vi. 10.

  Dysaules, brother of Celeus, and father of Triptolemus, i. 14; ii.
    12, 14.


  Earth, viii. 29; x. 12. The Great Goddess, i. 31.

  Earthquakes, ii. 7; vii. 24.

  Eating-contest between Lepreus and Hercules, v. 5.

  Ebony, i. 42; ii. 22; viii. 17, 53.

  Ecbatana, iv. 24.

  Echetlæus, his prowess at Marathon, i. 32.

  Echinades, islands, viii. 1, 24.

  Echoes, wonderful ones, ii. 35; v. 21.

  Edoni, i. 29; x. 33.

  Eels of Lake Copais, ix. 24.

  Eira, iv. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

  Elaphius, the month of, at Elis, v. 13; vi. 20.

  Electra, married to Pylades, ii. 16; iii. 1; ix. 40.

  Elephants, i. 12; v. 12.

  Eleusinian mysteries, viii. 15; x. 31.

  Eleutherolacones, iii. 21.

  Elk, v. 12; ix. 21.

  Elysium, viii. 53.

  Emperors, Roman, statues of, i. 40; v. 20; vi. 19. See also under
    _Adrian_, _Augustus_, _C. Julius Cæsar_, _Gaius_, &c. Flattery
    to, ii. 8, Note.

  Endœus, an Athenian statuary, and pupil of Dædalus, i. 26; vii. 5;
    viii. 46.

  Enyalius, a name for Ares, (the Latin _Mars_,) iii. 14, 15; v. 18.

  Enyo, i. 8; iv. 30.

  Epaminondas, iv. 26, 31; viii. 11, 27, 49, 52; ix. 13, 14, 15.

  Epeus, the constructor of the famous Wooden Horse, i. 23; ii. 29; x.
    26.

  Ephesus, temple of Artemis at, vii. 5. (Cf. Acts; xix. 27, 28. Farrar
    very aptly quotes Appul. _Metam._ ii. “Diana Ephesia, cujus nomen
    unicum, multiformi specie, ritu vario, nomine multijugo, _totus
    veneratur orbis_.”)

  Ephors at Sparta, iii. 11.

  Epicaste, mother of Œdipus, ix. 5, 26. Better known as _Jocasta_.

  Epidaurus, a town in Argolis, ii. 26, 27, 28, 29.

  Epigoni, ix. 9, 19, 25; x. 10, 25.

  Epimenides, the Rip Van Winkle of Antiquity, i. 14.

  Eponymi, the heroes so called at Athens, i. 5.

  Erato, the Nymph, wife of Arcas, an interpreter of the oracles of
    Pan, viii. 4, 37; x. 9.

  Erechtheus, i. 5, 26, 28, 38.

  Eridanus, a Celtic river, i. 4; v. 12, 14; viii. 25.

  Eriphyle, wife of Amphiaraus, slain by Alcmæon her son, i. 34; viii.
    24. The famous necklace, v. 17; viii. 24; ix. 41; x. 29.

  Erymanthian boar, viii. 24.

  Eryx, conquered in wrestling by Hercules, iii. 16; iv. 36; viii. 24.

  Essenes of Ephesian Artemis, viii. 13.

  Eteocles, the son of Œdipus, v. 19; ix. 5.

  Eubœa, v. 23; viii. 14.

  Euclides, an Athenian statuary, vii. 25, 26.

  Euclus, x. 12, 14, 24.

  Evœ, the Bacchic cry, iv. 31. (See Horace’s _Odes_, ii. 19-5-7.)

  Euphorion, ii. 22; x. 26.

  Euphrates, the river, iv. 34; x. 29.

  Eupolis, where buried, ii. 7.

  Euripides, i. 2, 21.

  Euripus, near Chalcis, i. 23, 38.

  Eurotas, river in Laconia, iii. 1, 21; viii. 44, 54.

  Euryclides, an Athenian orator, poisoned by Philip, ii. 9.

  Eurydice, the wife of Orpheus, ix. 30.

  Eurypontidæ, ii. 36; iii. 7, 12; iv. 4.

  Eurypylus, vii. 19.

  Eurystheus, his tomb, i. 44. His hostility to Hercules, iv. 34.

  Eurytion, a Centaur, v. 10; vii. 18.


  Fables of the Greeks, how to be understood, viii. 8.

  Filial piety, instances of, ii. 20; x. 28.

  Fire, its inventor, ii. 19. Ever-burning, v. 15; viii. 9, 37.
    Magically lighted, v. 27.

  Fish, vocal in the river Aroanius, viii. 21.

  Flax, v. 5; vi. 26; vii. 21.

  Flute-playing, iv. 27; ix. 12.

  Food, primitive, viii. 1.

  Foolish desires a source of ruin, viii. 24.

  Fortune, iv. 30.

  Friendship of Phocus and Iaseus, x. 30.

  Furies of Clytæmnestra, viii. 34. Furies euphemistically called _The
    Venerable Ones_, i. 28. Compare vii. 25.


  Gaius, the Roman Emperor, end of, ix. 27.

  Galati, their cavalry-arrangements, x. 19. Their irruption into
    Greece, x. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

  Ganymede, v. 24.

  Gelanor, ii. 19.

  Gerenia, called by Homer _Enope_, iii. 26.

  Germans, viii. 43.

  Geryon, i. 35; iii. 16; iv. 36; v. 19.

  Getæ, the, added to the Roman Empire by Trajan, v. 12. Brave in
    battle, i. 9.

  Giants, the, viii. 29, 32, 36, 47.

  _Girding oneself_, ix. 17.

  Girdles worn round the loins in the races at Olympia, i. 44.

  Glaucus of Carystus, story about, vi. 10.

  Glaucus of Chios, x. 16.

  Glaucus, the god of the sea, vi. 10.

  Gobryas, i. 1; iii. 11; ix. 1.

  Gods, the twelve, i. 3, 40; viii. 25. Unknown gods, i. 1; v. 14.

  Gorgias of Leontini, vi. 17; x. 18.

  Gorgon, ii. 21. See also Medusa.

  Gorgus, the son of Aristomenes, iv. 19, 21, 23.

  Graces, ix. 35.

  Grasshoppers, idiosyncrasy of, vi. 6.

  Greeks, apt to admire things out of their own country, ix. 36.
    Numbers that fought against Xerxes and the Galati, x. 20.
    Munificence of in their worship of the gods, v. 12.

  Griffins, i. 24.

  Gryllus, the son of Xenophon, i. 3; viii. 9, 11; ix. 15.

  Gymnopædia, festival of, iii. 11.

  Gythium, Lacedæmonian arsenal, i. 27; iii. 21; viii. 50.


  Hair, shorn to river-gods, i. 37; viii. 41. See also viii. 20.

  Halirrhothius, i. 21, 28.

  Hannibal, oracle about his death, viii. 11.

  Happiness only intermittent, viii. 24.

  Harmodius, i. 8, 29.

  Harmosts, officers among the Lacedæmonians, ix. 6, 32.

  Harpies, iii. 18; v. 17; x. 30.

  Hebe, i. 19; ii. 13, 17; viii. 9.

  Hecas, the seer, iv. 16, 21.

  Hecatæus, the Milesian, iii. 25; iv. 2; viii. 4, 47.

  Hecate, i. 43; ii. 22, 30.

  Hecatomphonia, iv. 19.

  Hector, son of Priam, iii. 18; v. 25; ix. 18; x. 31.

  Hecuba, x. 12, 27.

  He-goat, oracle about, iv. 20.

  Helen, the famous, a woe to Europe and Asia, x. 12. Tradition about,
    iii. 19. Her maids, x. 25. Oath taken about, iii. 20.

  Helen, a Jewess, her tomb, viii. 16.

  Helenus, son of Priam, i. 11; ii. 23; v. 22.

  Helicon, a mountain in Bœotia, ix. 26, 27, 28, 29.

  Hellas in Thessaly, gave name to the Hellenes, iii. 20.

  Hellebore, x. 36, 37.

  Helots, iii. 11, 20; iv. 23, 24; viii. 51.

  Hephæstus, (the Latin _Vulcan_,) i. 20; ii. 31; iii. 17; viii. 53;
    ix. 41.

  Hera, (the Latin _Juno_,) i. 18; ii. 15; v. 16; vi. 24. Story about
    her quarrel and reconciliation with Zeus, ix. 3. Becomes a virgin
    again annually, ii. 38. The cuckoo in connection with her, ii. 17.
    The peacock sacred to her, ii. 17.

  Heraclidæ, Return of the, ii. 13, 18; iii. 1; iv. 3.

  Hercules, the Egyptian, x. 13.

  Hercules, the son of Amphitryon, his Colonnade, vi. 23. Hunts the
    Erymanthian boar, viii. 24. Fights against the Amazons, v. 11, 25.
    Relieves Atlas, v. 10, 11. Brings up Cerberus from Hades, ii. 31,
    35; iii. 25; ix. 34. Cleans Elis, v. 1, 10; ix. 11. Drives off the
    oxen of Geryon, iii. 16, 18; iv. 36; v. 19. Overcomes the Nemean
    lion, iii. 18; v. 11; vi. 5; viii. 13. Has an eating contest with
    Lepreus, v. 5. First accounted a god by the people of Marathon,
    i. 15, 32. Taken to heaven by Athene, iii. 18, 19. Kills Nessus,
    iii. 18. Introduces into Greece the white poplar, v. 14. Liberates
    Prometheus, v. 10. His club, ii. 31. His Labours, iii. 17; v. 10,
    26.

  Hercules, the Idæan, v. 7, 13; ix. 27.

  Heredity, i. 6; viii. 5, 13.

  Hermæ, i. 17, 24; iv. 33; viii. 39; x. 12.

  Hermes, (the Latin _Mercury_,) vii. 27; viii. 14. Steals Apollo’s
    oxen, vii. 20. Takes the goddesses to Paris for the choice of
    beauty, iii. 18; v. 19. Invents the lyre, ii. 19; v. 14; viii. 17.

  Herodes Atticus, i. 19; ii. 1; vi. 21; vii. 20; x. 32.

  Herodotus, quoted or alluded to, i. 5, 28, 43; ii. 16, 20, 30; iii.
    2, 25; v. 26; viii. 27; ix. 23, 36; x. 20, 32, 33.

  Herophile, a Sibyl, x. 12.

  Hesiod, i. 2; ix. 30, 31, 38; x. 7. Quoted or alluded to, i. 24; ii.
    9.

  Hesperides, v. 11; vi. 19.

  Hides, garments made of, viii. 1; x. 38. Used as shields in battle,
    iv. 11.

  Hieronymus of Cardia, historian, i. 9, 13.

  Hilaira and Phœbe, ii. 22; iii. 16; iv. 31.

  Hipparchus, son of Pisistratus, i. 8, 23, 29.

  Hippocrene, ii. 31; ix. 31.

  Hippodamia, daughter of Œnomaus, v. 11, 14, 16, 17; vi. 20, 21; viii.
    14.

  Hippodrome at Olympia, vi. 20.

  Hippolyta, leader of the Amazons, i. 41.

  Hippolytus, son of Theseus, i. 22; ii. 27, 31, 32; iii. 22.

  Hippopotamus, iv. 34; v. 12; viii. 46.

  Homer, his age and birthplace, ix. 30; x. 24. His oracle, viii. 24;
    x. 24. His poverty, ii. 33. On Homer generally, i. 2; iv. 28, 33;
    vii. 5, 26; ix. 40; x. 7. Homer is quoted very frequently, viz., i.
    13, 28, 37; ii. 3, 6, 7, 12, 14, 16, 21, 24, 25, 26; iii. 2, 7, 18,
    19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26; iv. 1, 9, 30, 32, 33, 36; v. 6, 8, 11, 14,
    24; vi. 5, 22, 26, 26; vii. 1, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26; viii. 1, 3, 8,
    16, 18, 24, 25, 29, 37, 38, 41, 48, 50; ix. 5, 17, 19, 20, 22, 24,
    26, 29, 30, 31, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 41; x. 5, 6, 8, 14, 17, 22,
    25, 26, 29, 30, 32, 33, 36, 37.

  Hoopoe, i. 41; x. 4.

  Hoplodamus assists Rhea, viii. 32, 36.

  Horns of animals, v. 12. Horn of Amalthea, vi. 25.

  Horse, curious story in connection with, v. 27. The famous Wooden
    Horse, i. 23; x. 9. Winged horses, v. 17, 19.

  Hyacinth, the flower, i. 35; ii. 35.

  Hyampolis, a town in Phocis, x. 1, 3, 35.

  Hyantes, ix. 5, 35.

  Hydarnes, a general of Xerxes, iii. 4; x. 22.

  Hydra, ii. 37; v. 5; v. 17.

  Hygiea, daughter of Æsculapius, i. 23; v. 20. Her temple, iii. 22.

  Hyllus, son of Hercules, i. 35, 41, 44; iv. 30; viii. 5, 45, 53.

  Hymettus, famous for its bees, i. 32.

  Hyperboreans, i. 31; v. 7; x. 5.

  Hypermnestra, ii. 19, 20, 21, 25; x. 10, 35.

  Hyrieus, his treasury, story about, ix. 37.

  Hyrnetho, daughter of Temenus, ii. 19, 23. Her tragic end, ii. 28.


  Iamidæ, seers at Elis, descendants of Iamus, iii. 11, 12; iv. 16; vi.
    2; viii. 10.

  Ibycus, the poet, ii. 6.

  Icarus, the son of Dædalus, ix. 11.

  Ichnusa, the old name of Sardinia, x. 17.

  Idæan Dactyli, v. 7.

  Iliad, The Little, iii. 26; x. 26.

  Ilissus, a river in Attica, i. 19.

  Ilithyia, i. 18; viii. 32; ix. 27.

  Immortals, The, vi. 6; x. 19.

  Inachus, a river, ii. 15, 18, 25; viii. 6.

  Indian sages taught the immortality of the soul, iv. 32. India famous
    for wild beasts, iv. 34; viii. 29.

  Ino, i. 42, 44; iii. 23, 24, 26; iv. 34; ix. 5.

  Inscriptions, ox-fashion, v. 17.

  Inventions, source of, viii. 31.

  Inundations, destruction caused by, vii. 24; viii. 14.

  Io, daughter of Inachus, i. 25; iii. 18.

  Iodama, ix. 34.

  Iolaus, nephew of Hercules, vii. 2; viii. 14. Shares in his uncle’s
    Labours, i. 19; viii. 45. Kills Eurystheus, i. 44. Colonizes
    Sardinia, vii. 2; x. 17. His hero-chapel, ix. 23.

  Ion, the son of Xuthus, i. 31; vii. 1.

  Iphiclus, the father of Protesilaus, iv. 36; v. 17; x. 31.

  Iphigenia, daughter of Agamemnon, i. 33, 43; iii. 16; ix. 19.

  Iphimedea, mother of Otus and Ephialtes, ix. 22; x. 28.

  Iphitus, king of Elis, v. 4, 8; viii. 26.

  Iphitus, the son of Eurytus, iii. 15; x. 13.

  Iris, the flower, ix. 41.

  Iron, first fused, iii. 12; x. 16.

  Ischepolis, son of Alcathous, killed by the Calydonian boar, i. 42,
    43.

  Isis, the Egyptian goddess, i. 41; ii. 4, 13, 32, 34; v. 25; x. 32.

  Ismenius, a river in Bœotia, ix. 9, 10.

  Isocrates, i. 18.

  Issedones, i. 24, 31; v. 7.

  Isthmian games, i. 44; ii. 1, 2. People of Elis excluded from them,
    v. 2; vi. 16.

  Ister, river, viii. 28, 38.

  Ithome, iv. 9, 13, 14, 24, 31.

  Ivory, i. 12; v. 11, 12; vii. 27.

  _Ivy-cuttings_, feast so called, ii. 13.


  Jason, husband of Medea, ii. 3; v. 17.

  Jay, anecdote about the, viii. 12.

  Jerusalem, viii. 16.

  Jocasta, ix. 5. (Called Epicaste, ix. 26.)

  Joppa, iv. 35.

  Jordan, the famous river, v. 7.


  Keys, the three keys of Greece, vii. 7.

  Kites, idiosyncrasy of at Olympia, v. 14.


  Labyrinth of the Minotaur in Crete, i. 27. (Cf. Virg. Æneid, v.
    588-591. Ovid, Metamorphoses, viii. 159-168.)

  Lacedæmonians go out on campaign only when the moon is at its full,
    i. 28. Go out to battle not to the sound of the trumpet, but to
    flutes lyres and harps, iii. 17. Care not for poetry, iii. 8.
    Tactics in battle, iv. 8. Always conceal their losses in battle,
    ix. 13. Their forces at Thermopylæ, x. 20. Their kings, how tried,
    iii. 5.

  Lacedæmonian dialect, iii. 15. Brevity, iv. 7.

  Laconia originally called Lelegia, iv. 1.

  Ladder-pass, viii. 6.

  Læstrygones, viii. 29; x. 22.

  Lais, ii. 2.

  Laius, son of Labdacus, King of Thebes, ix. 5, 26; x. 5.

  Lamp of Athene, ever burning, i. 26.

  Lampsacus, people of, anecdote about, vi. 18. Great worshippers of
    Priapus, ix. 31.

  Laomedon, father of Priam, vii. 20; viii. 36.

  Lapithæ, their fight with the Centaurs, i. 17; v. 10.

  La Rochefoucauld anticipated by Pindar. Note, x. 22.

  Laurium, its silver mines, i. 1.

  Law-courts at Athens, various names of, i. 28.

  Leæna, mistress of Aristogiton, i. 23.

  Lebadea in Bœotia, sacred to Trophonius, i. 34; ix. 39.

  Lechæum, ii. 1, 2; ix. 14, 15; x. 37.

  Leda, i. 33; iii. 13, 16.

  Leonidas, the hero of Thermopylæ, i. 13; iii. 3, 4, 14; viii. 52.

  Leontini, the birth-place of the famous Gorgias, vi. 17.

  Leprosy, cure for, v, 5. (Credat Judæus Apella!)

  Lesbos, iii. 2; iv. 35; x. 19, 24.

  Lescheos, author of the _Capture of Ilium_, x. 25, 26, 27.

  Leto, (the Latin _Latona_,) i. 18, 31; iii. 20; viii. 53.

  Leucippus, his love for Daphne, viii. 20.

  Leuctra, i. 13; iv. 26; viii. 27; ix. 6, 13, 14.

  Libya, famous for wild beasts, ii. 21.

  Libyssa, where Hannibal died, viii. 11.

  Linus, ix. 29.

  Lipara, x. 11, 16.

  Lophis, story about, ix. 33. (Cf. story of Jephthah.)

  Lounges, iii. 14, 15; x. 25.

  Lots, iv. 3; v. 25.

  Love, its power, vii. 19. Success in love, vii. 26. Cure of
    melancholy caused by, vii. 5. Little sympathy with lovers from
    older people, vii. 19. Tragedies through love, i. 30; vii 21; viii.
    20.

  Lycomidæ, i. 22; iv. 1; ix. 27, 30.

  Lycortas, iv. 29; vii. 9; viii. 50.

  Lycurgus, the famous legislator, iii. 2, 14, 16, 18; v. 4.

  Lygdamis, the father of Artemisia, iii. 11.

  Lygdamis, the Syracusan, as big as Hercules, v. 8.

  Lynceus, son of Aphareus, his keen eyesight, iv. 2. Slain by Pollux,
    iv. 3.

  Lynceus, the husband of Hypermnestra, ii. 19, 21, 25. Succeeds
    Danaus, ii. 16.

  Lyre, invented by Hermes, v. 14; viii. 17. First used by Amphion, ix.
    5.

  Lysander, iii. 5, 6, 8, 11, 17, 18; ix. 32; x. 9.

  Lysippus, a Sicyonian statuary, i. 43; ii. 9, 20; vi. 1, 2, 4, 5, 14,
    17; ix. 27, 30.

  Lysis, the early schoolmaster of Epaminondas, ix. 13.


  Macaria, i. 32.

  Machærion, viii. 11.

  Machaon, son of Æsculapius, ii. 11, 23, 26, 38; iii. 26; iv. 3.

  Machinery, or mechanism, at Olympia, vi. 20. At Jerusalem, viii. 16.

  Mæander, river in Asia Minor, famous for its windings, v. 14; vii. 2;
    viii. 7, 24, 31; x. 32.

  Magic, v. 27.

  Maneros, the Egyptian Linus, ix. 29.

  Mantinea, ii. 8; viii. 3, 8, 12.

  Manto, daughter of Tiresias, vii. 3; ix. 10, 33.

  Marathon, i. 15, 32; iv. 25; x. 20.

  Mardonius, son of Gobryas, i. 1, 27; iii. 4; vii. 25; ix. 1, 2, 23.
    Panic of his men, i. 40; ix. 25.

  Marpessa, the Widow, viii. 47, 48.

  Marsyas, i. 24; ii. 7; viii. 9; x. 30.

  Martiora, ix. 21.

  Mausoleums, viii. 16.

  Mausolus, viii. 16.

  Medea, ii. 3, 12; viii. 11.

  Medusa, the Gorgon, i. 21; ii. 20, 21; v. 10, 12, 18; viii. 47; ix.
    34.

  Megalopolis, ii. 9, 27; iv. 29; vi. 12; viii. 27, 30, 33; ix. 14. Its
    theatre, ii. 27.

  Megara, i. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44; vii. 15.

  Megaris, i. 39, 44.

  Meleager, ii. 7; iv. 2; x. 31.

  Melicerta, i. 44; ii. 1; ix. 34.

  Memnon, his statue, i. 42.

  Memnonides, birds so called, x. 31.

  Memphis, i. 18.

  Menander, i. 2, 21.

  Menelaus, the son of Atreus and husband of Helen, iii. 1, 14, 19; v.
    18; x. 25, 26.

  Menestratus, ix. 26.

  Miletus, vii. 2, 24; viii. 24, 49; x. 33.

  Milo, of Croton, his wonderful strength, vi. 14.

  Miltiades, son of Cimon, i. 32; ii. 29; vi. 19; vii. 15; viii. 52.

  Minos, i. 17, 27; ii. 30, 34; iii. 2; vii. 2, 4; viii. 53.

  Minotaur, i. 27; iii. 18.

  Minyad, the poem so called, iv. 33; ix. 5; x. 28, 31.

  Mirrors, remarkable ones, vii. 21; viii. 37.

  Mithridates, king of Pontus, i. 20; iii. 23; ix. 7.

  Money, its substitute in old times, iii. 12.

  Moon enamoured of Endymion, v. 1. Full moon and the Lacedæmonians, i.
    28.

  Mullets, love mud, iv. 34.

  Mummius, ii. 1, 2; vii. 15, 16. His gifts at Olympia, v. 10, 24.

  Musæus, i. 14, 22, 25; iv. 1; x. 5, 7, 9, 12.

  Muses, the, ix. 29.

  Mycenæ, ii. 15, 16; v. 23; vii. 25; viii. 27, 33; ix. 34.

  Myrtilus, the son of Hermes, ii. 18; v. 1, 10; vi. 20; viii. 14.

  Myrtle, sacred to Aphrodite, vi. 24.

  Myrtoan sea, why so called, viii. 14.

  Myus, its mosquitoes, vii. 2.


  Nabis, tyrant at Sparta, iv. 29; vii. 8; viii. 50.

  Naked, its meaning among the ancients. See Note, x. 27.

  Names, confusion in same names general, viii. 15. Different method of
    giving names among Greeks and Romans, vii. 7.

  Narcissus, ix. 31, 41.

  Naupactian poems, ii. 3; iv. 2; x. 38.

  Naupactus, iv. 24, 26; vi. 16; ix. 25, 31; x. 38.

  Nausicaa, daughter of Alcinous, i. 22; v. 19.

  Neda, river, iv. 20, 36; v. 6; viii. 38, 41.

  Neleus, iv. 2, 36; v. 8; x. 29, 31. His posterity, ii. 18; iv. 3.

  Nemean games, ii. 15, 24; vi. 16; viii. 48; x. 25.

  Nemesis, i. 33; vii. 5, 20; ix. 35.

  Neoptolemus, son of Achilles, the Retribution of, iv. 17. (As to
    Neoptolemus generally, see _Pyrrhus_.)

  Nereids, ii. 1; iii. 26; v. 19.

  Nereus, iii. 21.

  Nero, the Roman Emperor, ii. 17, 37; v. 12, 25, 26; vii. 17; ix. 27;
    x. 7.

  Nessus, iii. 18; x. 38.

  Nestor, iii. 26; iv. 3, 31, 36.

  Nicias, the Athenian General, i. 29.

  Nicias, animal painter, i. 29; iii. 19; iv. 31; vii. 22.

  Nicopolis, founded by Augustus, v. 23; vii. 18; x. 8, 38.

  Nicostratus, v. 21.

  Night, v. 18; vii. 5.

  Night-attack, ingenious, x. 1.

  Nightingales at Orpheus’ tomb, ix. 30.

  Nile, famous river of Egypt, i. 33; ii. 5; iv. 34; v. 7, 14; viii.
    24; x. 32.

  Nineveh, viii. 33.

  Niobe, i. 21; ii. 21; v. 11, 16; viii. 2.

  Nisus, i. 19, 39; ii. 34.

  North wind, viii. 27. (_Boreas._)

  Nymphs, iii. 10; iv. 27; ix. 24; x. 31.

  Nymphon, ii. 11.


  Oceanus, i. 33.

  Ocnus, x. 29. See Note.

  Octavia, her temple at Corinth, ii 3.

  Odeum at Athens, i. 8, 14; vii. 20.

  Odysseus, (the Latin _Ulysses_,) i. 22, 35; iii. 12, 20; iv. 12; v.
    25; vi. 6; viii. 3, 14, 44; x. 8, 26, 28, 29, 31.

  Œdipodia, ix. 5.

  Œdipus, i. 28, 30; ix. 2, 5, 26; x. 5.

  Œnobius, i. 23.

  Œnomaus, v. 1, 10, 14, 17, 20, 22; vi. 18, 20, 21; viii. 14, 20.

  Œnotria, viii. 3.

  Œta, Mount, iii. 4; vii. 15; x. 22.

  Olen, i. 18; ii. 13; v. 7; viii. 21; ix. 27; x. 5.

  Oligarchies, established by Mummius, vii. 16, Note.

  Olympias, daughter of Neoptolemus, mother of Alexander the Great, i.
    11, 25; iv. 14; viii 7; ix. 7.

  Olympus, Mount, in Thessaly, vi. 5.

  Olynthus, iii. 5.

  Onatas, Æginetan statuary, v. 25, 27; vi. 12; viii. 42; x. 13.

  Onga, ix. 12.

  Onomacritus, i 22; viii. 31, 37; ix. 35.

  Ophioneus, the seer, iv. 10, 12, 13.

  Ophitea, legend about, x. 33.

  Opportunity, the youngest son of Zeus, v. 14.

  Oracles, ambiguous, viii. 11. (Compare case of ‘Jerusalem’ in
    Shakspere, 2 Henry IV., Act iv., Scene iv., 233-241.)

  Orestes, son of Agamemnon, i. 28; ii. 18, 31; iii. 1, 16, 22; vii.
    25; viii. 5, 34.

  Orithyia, i. 19; v. 19.

  Orontes, a river in Syria, vi. 2; viii. 20, 29, 33; x. 20.

  Orpheus, i. 14, 37; ii. 30; iii. 13, 14, 20; v. 26; vi. 20; ix. 17,
    27, 30.

  Osiris, x. 32.

  Osogo, viii. 10.

  Ostrich, ix. 31.

  Otilius, vii. 7; x. 36.

  Otus and Ephialtes, ix. 29.

  Ox-killer, i. 24, 28.

  Oxen given in barter, iii. 12.

  Oxyartes, father of Roxana, i. 6.

  Oxylus, curious tale about, v. 3.

  Ozolian, x. 38.


  Palæmon, i. 44; ii. 2; viii. 48.

  Palamedes, ii. 20; x. 31.

  Palladium, i. 28; ii. 23.

  Pamphus, i. 38, 39; vii. 21; viii. 35, 37; ix. 27, 29, 31, 35.

  Pan, i. 28; viii. 26, 31, 36, 38, 54.

  Panic fear, x. 23.

  Parian stone, i. 14, 33, 43; v. 11, 12; viii. 25.

  Paris, iii. 22; v. 19; x. 31.

  Parnassus, Mount, x. 4, 5, 6, 8, 32, 33.

  Parrots come from India, ii. 28. (Did Pausanias remember Ovid’s
    “Psittacus Eois imitatrix ales ab Indis.” Amor. ii. 6. 1.)

  Parthenon at Athens, i. 24; viii. 41.

  Patroclus, the friend of Achilles, iii. 24; iv. 28; x. 13, 26, 30.

  Patroclus, Egyptian Admiral, i. 1; iii. 6.

  Pausanias, son of Cleombrotus, i. 13; iii. 17; viii. 52.

  Pausanias, a Macedonian, murderer of Harpalus, ii. 33.

  Peacock sacred to Hera, ii. 17.

  Peace with Wealth, i. 8; ix. 16.

  Pegasus, ii. 4, 31; ix. 31.

  Pelagos, viii. 11. See Oracles, ambiguous.

  Peleus, father of Achilles, i. 37; ii. 29; iii. 18; v. 18; viii. 45;
    x. 30.

  Pelias, iv. 2; v. 8, 17; viii. 11; x. 30.

  Pelion, Mount, x. 19.

  Peloponnesian War, iii. 7; iv. 6; viii. 41, 52.

  Pelops, ii. 18, 22, 26; v. 1, 8, 10, 13, 17; vi. 20, 21, 24; viii.
    14; ix. 40.

  Pencala, river in Phrygia, viii. 4; x. 32.

  Penelope, wife of Odysseus, iii. 12, 13, 20; viii. 12.

  Pentelicus, a mountain in Attica, famous for its stone quarries, i.
    19, 32.

  Penthesilea, v. 11; x. 31.

  Pentheus, i. 20; ii. 2; ix. 2, 5.

  Periander, son of Cypselus, one of the Seven Wise Men, i. 23; x. 24.

  Pericles, i. 25, 28, 29; viii. 41.

  Perjury punished, ii. 2, 18; iv. 22; v. 24.

  Pero, the matchless daughter of Neleus, x. 31.

  Perseus, son of Danae, and grandson of Acrisius, i. 22; ii. 15, 16,
    20, 21, 22, 27; iii. 17; iv. 35; v. 18.

  Persians, i. 18, 32, 33; iii. 9; ix. 32. Their shields called
    _Gerrha_, viii. 50; x. 19.

  Petroma, viii. 15.

  Phæacians, iii. 18; viii. 29.

  Phædra, the wife of Theseus, enamoured of her stepson Hippolytus, i.
    22; ii. 32; ix. 16; x. 29.

  Phaennis, a prophetess, x. 15, 20.

  Phaethon, i. 3.

  Phalanthus, x. 10, 13.

  Phalerum, i. 1, 28.

  Phemonoe, first priestess of Apollo at Delphi, x. 5, 6, 12.

  Phidias, famous Athenian statuary, i. 3, 4, 24, 28, 33, 40; v. 10,
    11; vi. 4, 25, 26; vii. 27; ix. 4, 10; x. 10. His descendants, v.
    14.

  Philammon, father of Thamyris, iv. 33; x. 7.

  Philip, oracle about the two Philips, vii. 8.

  Philip, the son of Amyntas, i. 6, 25; ii. 20; iii. 7, 24; iv. 28; v.
    4; vii. 7, 10, 11; viii. 7, 27; ix. 1, 37; x. 2, 3, 36.

  Philip, the son of Demetrius, i. 36; ii. 9; vi. 16; vii. 7, 8; viii.
    8, 50; x. 33, 34.

  Philoctetes, v. 13; viii. 8, 33; x. 27.

  Philomela, i. 5, 14, 41; x. 4.

  Philomelus, x. 2, 8, 33.

  Philopœmen, son of Craugis, iv. 29; vii. 9; viii. 27, 49, 51, 52.

  Phocian Resolution, x. 1.

  Phocian War, iv. 28; ix. 6; x. 3.

  Phœbe, see Hilaira.

  Phœnix, x. 26.

  Phormio, son of Asopichus, i. 23, 29; x. 11.

  Phormio, the fisherman of Erythræ, vii. 5.

  Phormio inhospitable to Castor and Pollux, iii. 16.

  Phoroneus, ii. 15, 19, 20, 21.

  Phrixus, son of Athainas, i. 24; ix. 34, 38.

  Phrontis, the pilot of Menelaus, x. 25.

  Phryne, beloved by Praxiteles, i. 20; ix. 27; x. 15.

  Phrynichus, play of, x. 31.

  Phytalus, i. 37.

  Pillars, viii. 45.

  Pindar, i. 8; ix. 22, 23, 25; x. 24. Quoted or alluded to, i. 2, 41;
    iii. 25; iv. 2, 30; v. 14, 22; vi. 2; vii. 2, 26; ix. 22; x. 5, 16,
    22.

  Piræus, i. 1.

  Pirithous, son of Zeus, and friend of Theseus, i. 17, 30; v. 10;
    viii. 45; x. 29.

  Pisander of Camirus, ii. 37; viii. 22.

  Pisistratus, tyrant of Athens, i. 3, 23; ix. 6. Collects Homer’s
    Poems, vii. 26.

  Pittacus of Mitylene, one of the Seven Wise Men, x. 24.

  Plane-trees, wonderful, vii. 22, with Note.

  Platanistas at Sparta, iii. 11, 14.

  Platæa, battle at, v. 23; vi. 3; ix. 2; x. 15.

  Plato, the famous, i. 30; iv. 32. Quoted, vii. 17. Cited, x. 24.

  Pluto, i. 38; ii. 36; ix. 23.

  Poets, at kings’ courts, i. 3. Statues of, ix. 30.

  Pollux, see Dioscuri.

  Polybius, viii. 9, 30, 37, 44, 48.

  Polycletus, Argive statuary, ii. 17, 20, 22, 24, 27; vi. 2, 4, 7, 9,
    13; viii. 31.

  Polycrates, i. 2; viii. 14.

  Polydamas, vi. 5.

  Polydectes, i. 22.

  Polygnotus, famous Thasian painter, i. 18, 22; ix. 4; x. 25, 26, 27,
    28, 29, 30, 31.

  Polynices, son of Œdipus, ii. 19, 20, 25; iv. 8; ix. 5; x. 10.

  Polyxena, i. 22; x. 25.

  Pomegranate, ii. 17; vi. 14; viii. 37; ix. 25.

  Poplar, ii. 10; v. 13, 14.

  Poseidon, (the Latin _Neptune_,) i. 24, 27, 30; ii. 1, 4, 22, 30; vi.
    25; viii. 10, 25, 42.

  Praxias, x. 19.

  Praxiteles, the famous, lover of Phryne, i. 2, 20, 23, 40, 43, 44;
    ii. 21; v. 17; vi. 26; ix. 1, 2, 11, 27, 39; x. 15, 37.

  Priam, ii. 24; iv. 17; x. 25, 27.

  Priapus, ix. 31.

  Processions, i. 2, 29; ii. 35; vii. 18; x. 18.

  Procne, i. 24, 41.

  Procrustes, i. 38.

  Prœtus, ii. 7, 12, 16, 25; viii. 18; x. 10.

  Prometheus, ii. 14, 19; v. 10; x. 4.

  Promontory called _Ass’ jawbone_, iii. 22, 23.

  Prophetical men and women, x. 12, with Note.

  Proserpine, i. 38; ii. 36; iv. 30; viii. 31, 42, 53; ix. 23, 31.

  Proteus, iii. 18; viii. 53.

  Proverbs, see ii. 9; iv. 17; vi. 3, 10; vii. 12; ix. 9, 30, 37; x. 1,
    14, 17, 29.

  Providence, v. 25.

  Prusias, viii. 11.

  Psamathe, i. 43; ii. 19.

  Psyttalea, island of, i. 36; iv. 36.

  Ptolemies proud of calling themselves Macedonians, x. 7, cf. vi. 3.
    Much about the various Ptolemies in, i. 6, 7, 8, 9.

  Purple, iii. 21; v. 12.

  Puteoli, iv. 35; viii. 7.

  Pylades, i. 22; ii. 16, 29; iii. 1.

  Pylæ, that is Thermopylæ, ix. 15.

  Pylos, iv. 2, 3, 31, 36.

  Pyramids, ix. 36.

  Pyrrhus (Neoptolemus), the son of Achilles, i. 4, 11, 13; ii. 23;
    iii. 20, 25, 26; iv. 17; x. 7, 23, 24, 25, 26.

  Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, i. 6, 9, 10, 11; iv. 29, 35.

  Pythionice, i. 37.

  Pytho, v. 3; x. 6.


  Quoits, ii. 16; v. 3; vi. 14.


  Return from Ilium, Poem so called, x. 28, 29, 30.

  Rhea, viii. 8, 36; ix. 2, 41.

  Rhegium, iv. 23, 26; v. 25.

  Rhianus, iv. 1, 6, 15, 17.

  Rhinoceros, v. 12; ix. 21. Called also Ethiopian bull.

  Rhœcus of Samos, viii. 14; ix. 41; x. 38.

  Rose, sacred to Aphrodite, vi. 24.

  Roxana, wife of Alexander the Great, i. 6; ix. 7.


  Sacadas, ii. 22; iv. 27; vi. 14; ix. 30; x. 7.

  Sacrifices, remarkable, vii. 18; viii. 29, 37.

  Sails, an invention of Dædalus, ix. 11.

  Salamis, i. 35, 36, 40.

  Samos, vii. 2, 4, 10.

  Sanctuaries, not to be approached by the profane, viii. 5; x. 32,
    (Procul o, procul este, profani!)

  Sappho, the Lesbian Poetess, i. 25, 29; viii. 18; ix. 27, 29.

  Sardinia, x. 17.

  Sardis, iii. 9; iv. 24.

  Sardonic laughter, x. 17.

  Saturnus. See Cronos.

  Satyrs, i. 23. Satyr of Praxiteles, i. 20.

  Scamander, v. 25.

  Scedasus and his two daughters, ix. 13.

  Scimetar of Cambyses, i. 28.

  Scipio, viii. 30.

  Sciron, killed by Theseus, i. 3, 44.

  Scopas, i. 43; ii. 10, 22; vi. 25; viii. 28, 45, 47; ix. 10, 17.

  Scorpion with wings, ix. 21.

  Scylla, daughter of Nisus, legend about, ii. 34.

  Scyllis of Scione, famous diver, x. 19.

  Scythians, travel in waggons, viii. 43. (Compare Horace, Odes, Book
    iii. Ode 24. 9-11. “Campestres melius Scythae, Quorum plaustra
    vagas rite trahunt domos, Vivunt.”)

  Sea, Red, i. 33. Dead, v. 7.

  Seasons, v. 11, 17; ix. 35.

  Seleucia, on the Orontes, i. 16; viii. 33.

  Seleucus, son of Antiochus, i. 6, 16.

  Semele, daughter of Cadmus, mother of Dionysus by Zeus, ii. 31, 37;
    iii. 24; ix. 5.

  Serapis, i. 18; ii. 4, 34; iii. 14, 22, 25; iv. 32; vii. 21; ix. 24.

  Ser, and the Seres, vi. 26.

  Seriphus, i. 22.

  Serpents, remarkable ones, viii. 4, 16. None in Sardinia, x. 17.

  Sheep, accompanying Spartan kings to war, ix. 13.

  Shields, Used by the Celts in fording rivers, x. 20.

  Ship at Delos, i. 29.

  Sibyl, ii. 7; vii. 8; x. 9.

  Sibyls, various, x. 12.

  Sicily, a small hill near Athens, viii. 11.

  Sight suddenly lost and recovered, iv. 10, 12; x. 38.

  Silenus, i. 4, 23; ii. 22; iii. 25. Sileni mortal, vi. 24.

  Simonides, i. 2; iii. 8; vi. 9; ix. 2; x. 27.

  Sinis, i. 37; ii. 1. (Pityocamptes.)

  Sirens, ix. 34; x. 6.

  Sisters, love of by brothers, i. 7; iv. 2; ix. 31.

  Sisyphus, son of Æolus, ii. 1, 3, 5; x. 31.

  Sleep the god most friendly to the Muses, ii. 31.

  Smyrna, v. 8; vii. 5.

  Snake, story about, x. 33.

  Socrates, i. 22, 30; ix. 35.

  Solon, i. 16, 18; x. 24.

  Sophocles, i. 21, 28.

  Sosigenes, viii. 31.

  Sosipolis, vi. 20, 25.

  Sparta, iii. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

  Sparti, viii. 11; ix. 5. Note. ix. 10.

  Speech, ill-advised, iii. 7, 8.

  Sperchius, river, x. 20, 21, 22, 23.

  Sphacteria, i. 13, 15; iii. 5; iv. 36; v. 26; vi. 22.

  Sphinx, the, ix. 26.

  Spiders, ix. 6.

  Stade. See Note, i. 1.

  Stesichorus, iii. 19.

  Stratagems of Homer, iv. 28.

  Strongyle, a volcanic island, x. 11.

  Stymphelides, birds so called, viii. 22.

  Styx, river, viii. 17, 18.

  Submission to an enemy, technical term for, Note on x. 20. See also
    iii. 12.

  Sulla, i. 20; ix. 7, 33; x. 20.

  Sun-shade used by ladies, vii. 22.

  Sunium, i. 1, 28.

  Suppliants not to be injured with impunity, vii. 24, 25. See also
    iii. 4; iv. 24.

  Sus, river, ix. 30.

  Susa, i. 42; iii. 9, 16; iv. 31; vi. 5.

  Swallows, idiosyncrasy of at Daulis, x. 4.

  Swan-eagles, viii. 17.


  Tænarum, promontory of, iii. 14, 25; iv. 24.

  Tantalus, ii. 22; v. 13; x. 30, 31.

  Taraxippus, vi. 20.

  Tarentum, iii. 12; x. 10, 13.

  Tarsus, viii. 28.

  Telamon, son of Æacus, i. 35, 42; ii. 29; viii. 45.

  Telesilla, ii. 20, 28, 35.

  Tellias of Elis, x. 1, 13.

  Tenedos, x. 14. Tenedian axe, x. 14.

  Tereus, i. 5, 41; ix. 16; x. 4.

  Teucer, son of Telamon, i. 28; viii. 15.

  Thamyris, iv. 33; ix. 5, 30; x. 7, 30.

  Thebes, ii. 6; iv. 27; vii. 15, 17; viii. 33; ix. 3, 5, 6, 7, 8.

  Themis, v. 17; viii. 25; x. 5.

  Themisto, reputed by some mother of Homer, x. 24.

  Themistocles, i. 1, 36; viii. 50, 52; x. 14.

  Theoclus, Messenian seer, iv. 16, 20, 21.

  Theodorus of Samos, iii. 12; viii. 14; ix. 41; x. 38. His seal carved
    out of an emerald for Polycrates, viii. 14.

  Thermopylæ, vii. 15; ix. 32; x. 20, 21.

  Thersites, x. 31.

  Theseus, i. 1, 2, 3, 17, 19, 22, 27, 37, 39, 41, 44; ii. 1, 22, 30,
    32; iii. 18, 24; v. 10, 11; vii. 17; viii. 45, 48; ix. 31, 40; x.
    29.

  Thetis, mother of Achilles, v. 18, 22.

  Thucydides, the famous Historian, i. 23; vi. 19. Possibly alluded to,
    i. 8.

  Thyestes, ii. 18.

  Thyiades, x. 4, 19, 32.

  Thyrsus of Dionysus, iv. 36; viii. 31.

  Tiger, ix. 21.

  Timagoras, tragic story of, i. 30.

  Timon of Athens, the famous Misanthrope, i. 30.

  Timotheus, the Milesian harper and poet, iii. 12; viii. 50.

  Tiphys, the pilot of the Argo, ix. 32.

  Tiresias, vii. 3; ix. 18, 32, 33.

  Tiryns, ii. 16, 17, 25; v. 23; vii. 25; viii. 2, 33, 46; ix. 36.

  Tisias, vi. 17.

  Tissaphernes, iii. 9.

  Titans, the, vii. 18; viii. 37.

  Tityus, iii. 18; x. 4, 11, 29.

  Tomb of Helen, a Jewess, at Jerusalem, viii. 16.

  Tortoises, i. 44; viii. 23. Lyres made out of them, ii. 19; viii. 17,
    54.

  Townships of Attica, i. 31, 32, 33.

  Traitors, various ones that troubled Greece, vii. 10.

  Trajan, the Emperor, iv. 35; v. 12.

  Treasuries, ix. 36, 37, 38; x. 11.

  Trench, the Great, iv. 6, 17, 20, 22.

  Tripods, v. 17; vii. 4.

  Triptolemus, i. 14, 38; ii. 14; vii. 18; viii. 4.

  Tritons, viii. 2; ix. 20, 21.

  Trœzen, ii. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.

  Trophies, unwisdom of erecting, ix. 40.

  Trophonius, iv. 16, 32; viii. 10; ix. 11, 37, 39, 40; x. 5.

  Tros, father of Ganymede, v. 24.

  Troy, why it fell, x. 33. (Compare Horace, Odes, iii. 3. 18-21.
    “Ilion, Ilion Fatalis incestusque judex Et mulier peregrina vertit
    In pulverem.”)

  Tyndareus, ii. 18; iii. 1, 15, 17, 18, 21.

  Tyrants, the Thirty, i. 29.

  Tyrtæus, iv. 6, 8, 13, 14, 15, 16.


  Ulysses. See Odysseus.

  Umpires at Olympia, v. 9.

  Unknown gods, i. 1; v. 14. (Compare Acts: xvii. 23.)


  Venus. See Aphrodite.

  Vermilion, viii. 39.

  Vespasian, the Roman Emperor, vii. 17.

  Vesta, i. 18; ii. 35; v. 14.

  Vinegar, its effect on Pearls, viii. 18.

  Voice, found through terror, x. 15.

  Volcanic islands, x. 11.

  Vulcan. See Hephæstus.


  Water, various kinds of, iv. 35.

  To whitewash two walls, Proverb, vi. 3. See Note.

  Wine elevating, iii. 19. (“Vinum lætificat cor hominis.” Ps. ciii.
    15.)

  Wise Men, the Seven, i. 23; x. 24. Their famous sayings, especially
    _Know thyself_, and _Not too much of anything_, x. 24.

  Wolves, men turned into, vi. 8; viii. 2. Many in the neighbourhood of
    Croton, vi. 14. None in Sardinia, x. 17.

  Word for the day given to soldiers, ix. 27.

  Wordsworth on Daphne. See Note, x. 7.

  World, centre of, x. 16.

  Worshipping the deity with other people’s incense, Proverb, ix. 30.


  Xanthippus, father of Pericles, i. 25; iii. 7; viii. 52.

  Xenocrates, iv. 32; ix. 13.

  Xenophon, i. 3; v. 6; ix. 15.

  Xerxes, i. 8; iii. 4; vi. 5; viii. 42, 46; x. 7, 35.


  Young, Dr., On Commentators, Preface, p. vi.


  Zancle, iv. 23.

  Zethus, ii. 6; ix. 5, 8, 17.

  Zeus, (the Latin _Jupiter_,) the chief of the gods, viii. 36. Assumed
    the appearance of Amphitryon, v. 18. Traditions about his early
    years, iv. 33; v. 7; viii. 8, 28, 36, 38. His two jars, viii. 24.
    Represented with three eyes, why, ii. 24.




                             END OF VOL. I.




          CHISWICK PRESS:--C. WHITTINGHAM AND CO., TOOKS COURT,
                             CHANCERY LANE.




Transcriber’s Notes


The cover image was created by the transcriber and is placed in the
public domain.

The index has been copied from Volume 2 for the convenience of the
reader. Some incorrect references have been removed.

Minor spelling and punctuation errors have been corrected. In addition
many errors and inconsistent spellings have been corrected as follows:

  Changed =acordance= to =accordance= on page 365 in “in accordance
    with the oracle at Delphi”.

  Changed =Æchylus= to =Æschylus= on page 116 in “next to that of
    Æschylus”.

  Changed =Ægos-Potamoi= to =Ægos-potamoi= on page 207 in “the victory
    at Ægos-potamoi”.

  Changed =Ægospotamoi= to =Ægos-potamoi= on page 204 in “the other at
    Ægos-potamoi”, page 261 in “Afterwards too at Ægos-potamoi”, page
    278 in “the Athenians at Ægos-potamoi” and page 366 in “was taken
    at Ægos-potamoi”.

  Changed =Aglauros= to =Aglaurus= on page 5 in “Erse, and Aglaurus,
    and Pandrosus”.

  Changed =Amphiarus= to =Amphiaraus= on page 68 in “oracular responses
    of Amphiaraus”.

  Changed =Amphisse= to =Amphissa= on page 186 in “the Locrians of
    Amphissa”.

  Changed =Aphidne= to =Aphidna= on page 204 in “the spoils from
    Aphidna”.

  Changed =Aristus= to =Aristæus= on page 46 in “says Aristæus the
    Proconnesian”.

  Changed =arts= to =parts= on page 90 in “maritime parts of Attica”.

  Changed =Auxesias= to =Auxesia= on page 150 in “what concerns Auxesia
    and Lamia”.

  Changed =Bææ= to =Bœæ= on page 52 in “Bœæ in the neighbouring
    country”.

  Changed =bas-relief= to =bas relief= on page 92 in “in bas relief the
    sons of Tyndareus”.

  Changed =bearhunting= to =bear-hunting= on page 212 in “superfine
    deer-hunting and bear-hunting”.

  Changed =boarhunting= to =boar-hunting= on page 212 in “excellent
    goat-hunting and boar-hunting”.

  Changed =Caphereus= to =Caphareus= on page 301 in “Such was the case
    with Caphareus”.

  Changed =Cappodocians= to =Cappadocians= on page 202 in “the
    Cappadocians who live near the Euxine”.

  Changed =Cephissus= to =Cephisus= on page 129 in “built to the river
    Cephisus” and page 129 in “the temple of the Cephisus”.

  Changed =Chersonnese= to =Chersonese= on page 20 in “conveyed it to
    the Chersonese” and page 68 in “as Eleus in the Chersonese”.

  Changed =child-birth= to =childbirth= on page 103 in “Xenodice, who
    died in childbirth”.

  Changed =Cnidos= to =Cnidus= on page 351 in “the people of the
    Chersonese in Cnidus”.

  Changed =co-operated= to =cooperated= on page 170 in “They cooperated
    also with Grais”.

  Changed =Colossusses= to =Colossuses= on page 34 in “the Colossuses
    at Rhodes and Rome”.

  Changed =council-chamber= to =council chamber= on page 6 in “next to
    it a council chamber” and page 6 in “And in the council chamber”.

  Changed =Council-Chamber= to =Council Chamber= on page 352 in “statue
    of Zeus in the Council Chamber”.

  Changed =deathbed= to =death-bed= on page 28 in “on his death-bed”.

  Changed =deerhunting= to =deer-hunting= on page 212 in “superfine
    deer-hunting and bear-hunting”.

  Changed =Demarchus= to =Damarchus= on page 375 in “Damarchus the son
    of Dinnytas”.

  Changed =doublecourse= to =double course= on page 113 in “and two in
    the double course”.

  Changed =dropt= to =dropped= on page 253 in “dropped its shield” and
    page 259 in “dropped his shield”.

  Changed =Eleusininian= to =Eleusinian= on page 293 in “sanctity to
    the Eleusinian Mysteries”.

  Changed =Endæus= to =Endœus= on page 50 in “Endœus was an Athenian by
    race” and page 50 in “and Endœus designed it”.

  Changed =Eœœ= to =Eœæ= on page 230 in “the Great Eœæ”.

  Changed =equi-distant= to =equidistant= on page 64 in “equidistant
    from Athens and Carystus”.

  Changed =Eubæa= to =Eubœa= on page 9 in “who settled at Eubœa”.

  Changed =Eumolphus= to =Eumolpus= on page 117 in “Eumolpus remained
    at Eleusis”.

  Changed =Eurypulus= to =Eurypylus= on page 227 in “in their singing
    to Eurypylus”.

  Changed =figtree= to =fig tree= on page 73 in “gave him in return a
    fig tree”, page 266 in “he took Aristomenes to this fig tree” and
    page 270 in “lately did the wild fig tree teach the same lesson”.

  Changed =fluteplayer= to =flute-player= on page 88 in “the Samian
    flute-player Telephanes”.

  Changed =fluteplayers= to =flute-players= on page 134 in “the anger
    of Apollo against flute-players”.

  Changed =fluteplaying= to =flute-playing= on page 315 in “the Pythian
    flute-playing was introduced”.

  Changed =Gelenor= to =Gelanor= on page 120 in “Gelanor the son of
    Sthenelas”.

  Changed =Geraneia= to =Gerania= on page 78 in “the top of Mount
    Gerania”.

  Changed =goathunting= to =goat-hunting= on page 212 in “excellent
    goat-hunting and boar-hunting”.

  Changed =greatgrandson= to =great-grandson= on page 78 in “and a
    great-grandson Sciron”.

  Changed =head-quarters= to =headquarters= on page 228 in “where the
    royal headquarters were established”.

  Changed =hegoat= to =he-qoat= on page 266 in “When he-goat drinks of
    Neda’s winding stream”.

  Changed =Herse= to =Erse= on page 33 in “to her sisters Erse and
    Pandrosus”.

  Changed =jaw-bone= to =jawbone= on page 217 in “which they call Ass’
    jawbone”.

  Changed =Lacedamonians= to =Lacedæmonians= on page 6 in “the
    slaughter of the Lacedæmonians at Leuctra”.

  Changed =Lacedemon= to =Lacedæmon= on page 28 in “the plague at
    Lacedæmon”.

  Changed =Lacedemonian= to =Lacedæmonian= on page 2 in “the
    Lacedæmonian fleet off Cnidus” and page 25 in “a Lacedæmonian led a
    hostile force”.

  Changed =Lacedemonians= to =Lacedæmonians= on page 6 in “who
    were sent to aid the Lacedæmonians”, page 6 in “the help that
    came to the Lacedæmonians”, page 25 in “the territory of the
    Lacedæmonians”, page 28 in “a poem on him for the Lacedæmonians”,
    page 29 in “at Œnoe in Argive territory, against the Lacedæmonians”
    and page 30 in “the Lacedæmonians who were captured”.

  Changed =Lamias= to =Lamia= on page 150 in “what concerns Auxesia and
    Lamia”.

  Changed =Lawgiving= to =Law-giving= on page 62 in “a temple to
    Law-giving Demeter”.

  Changed =lawgiving= to =Law-giving= on page 83 in “a temple of
    Law-giving Demeter”.

  Changed =Lethæum= to =Lethæus= on page 70 in “Among the Magnesians at
    Lethæus”.

  Changed =lightarmed= to =light-armed= on page 242 in “the light-armed
    troops of the Messenians”.

  Changed =Market Place= to =Market-Place= on page 332 in “an altar of
    Artemis of the Market-Place”.

  Changed =market place= to =market-place= on page 152 in “In
    the market-place is a temple” and page 217 in “And near the
    market-place are fountains”.

  Changed =Market-place= to =Market-Place= on page 331 in “an altar of
    Artemis of the Market-Place” and page 331 in “an altar of Zeus of
    the Market-Place”.

  Changed =marketplace= to =market-place= on page 104 in “from the
    temple of Dionysus to the market-place”, page 105 in “in the middle
    of the present market-place”, page 108 in “And in the part of
    the market-place”, page 109 in “Not far from the market-place”,
    page 131 in “And not far from the building in the market-place”,
    page 158 in “a statue in the market-place”, page 189 in “there is
    a handsome market-place”, page 189 in “public buildings in the
    market-place”, page 189 in “But the most notable thing in the
    market-place”, page 191 in “As you go from the market-place”, page
    193 in “people of Ægæ in Achaia in their market-place”, page 193 in
    “And there is another outlet from the market-place”, page 196 in
    “As you go westwards from the market-place”, page 215 in “In the
    market-place they have statues”, page 218 in “in the market-place
    of Bœæ”, page 223 in “a conduit in the market-place”, page 289 in
    “And in the market-place at Messene” and page 295 in “a brazen
    statue of Zeus Soter in the market-place”.

  Changed =Mnasinus= to =Mnasinous= on page 134 in “their sons, Anaxis
    and Mnasinous”.

  Changed =Munichia= to =Munychia= on page 2 in “The Athenians have
    also another harbour at Munychia”.

  Changed =Nausicae= to =Nausicaa= on page 42 in “Odysseus suddenly
    making his appearance as Nausicaa”.

  Changed =Œclees= to =Œcles= on page 192 in “Amphiaraus the son of
    Œcles”.

  Changed =Œniadœ= to =Œniadæ= on page 277 in “marched against the
    Messenians at Œniadæ” and page 278 in “they quietly slipped out of
    Œniadæ”.

  Changed =Olmpiad= to =Olympiad= on page 318 in “And in the 2nd
    Olympiad after this”.

  Changed =Pandrosos= to =Pandrosus= on page 5 in “Erse, and Aglaurus,
    and Pandrosus”.

  Changed =Pan-hellenium= to =Pan-Hellenium= on page 150 in “the
    mountain Pan-Hellenium has nothing of note”.

  Changed =Panhellenian= to =Pan-Hellenian= on page 150 in “the
    mountain of Pan-Hellenian Zeus”.

  Changed =pell-mell= to =pell mell= on page 65 in “thrown them in pell
    mell”.

  Changed =Peloponnesse= to =Peloponnese= on page 26 in “pressed into
    the Peloponnese”.

  Changed =Pergamum North= to =Pergamum north= on page 326 in “at
    Pergamum north of the river Caicus”.

  Changed =pine trees= to =pine-trees= on page 312 in “full of wild
    pine-trees”.

  Changed =pinetrees= to =pine-trees= on page 91 in “the robber Sinis
    took two pine-trees”, page 91 in “he tied to these pine-trees” and
    page 92 in “and on the other pine-trees planted in a row”.

  Changed =plane tree= to =plane-tree= on page 295 in “the water flows
    from a plane-tree”.

  Changed =plane trees= to =plane-trees= on page 407 in “There are some
    lofty plane-trees”.

  Changed =planetrees= to =plane-trees= on page 165 in “And the grove
    of plane-trees”.

  Changed =Planetrees= to =Plane-Trees= on page 159 in “Apollo called
    The God of the Plane-Trees”.

  Changed =Plotemy= to =Ptolemy= on page 1 in “Ptolemy, the son of
    Lagus”.

  Changed =porticos= to =porticoes= on page 195 in “a place which has
    porticoes forming a square”.

  Changed =Pyrrhicus= to =Pyrrhichus= on page 223 in “And the temples
    at Pyrrhichus are two”.

  Changed =racecourse= to =race-course= on page 155 in “what is called
    Hippolytus’ race-course”, page 160 in “and near it some remains of
    a race-course” and page 292 in “in the race-course at Messene”.

  Changed =rase= to =raze= on page 395 in “raze the whole town to its
    foundations”.

  Changed =rased= to =razed= on page 349 in “Mycenæ and Tiryns were
    razed to the ground” and page 405 in “razed Pisa to the ground”.

  Changed =Sacades= to =Sacadas= on page 134 in “the sepulchre of
    Sacadas”.

  Changed =seafight= to =sea-fight= on page 60 in “five Attic triremes
    present at the sea-fight” and page 72 in “fought the great
    sea-fight against Xerxes”.

  Changed =seafish= to =sea fish= on page 294 in “And some sea fish
    swim up it”.

  Changed =stopt= to =stopped= on page 385 in “knew that it had come in
    first, and stopped running”.

  Changed =Stromius= to =Stomius= on page 364 in “and Stomius won one
    victory in the pentathlum”.

  Changed =Tamagra= to =Tanagra= on page 191 in “And the fifth victory
    was at Tanagra”.

  Changed =thighbones= to =thigh-bones= on page 185 in “and threw the
    thigh-bones of the victims”.

  Changed =vissitudes= to =vicissitudes= on page 31 in “the life of man
    and its vicissitudes”.

  Changed =wes= to =was= on page 161 in “Chthonia was conveyed to
    Hermione by Demeter”.

  Changed =who’s= to =whose= on page 232 in “he whose lot came up
    first”.

  Changed =wildboars= to =wild boars= on page 110 in “And they offer in
    sacrifice to her the thighs of any victims but wild boars”.

On page 41 the word =white= was changed to =black= in “And Ægeus seeing
the ship with black sails” to make the text agree with the well-known
story of Theseus and Ægeus.

On page 217 the sentence “Marius indeed has plenty of water if any
place” does not make much sense. Other translations indicate that
Marius has an unsurpassed supply of water.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAUSANIAS' DESCRIPTION OF GREECE, VOLUME I. ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Pausanias' description of Greece, Volume II.
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Pausanias' description of Greece, Volume II.

Author: active approximately 150-175 Pausanias

Translator: A. R. Shilleto


        
Release date: August 4, 2022 [eBook #68680]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: George Bell and Sons, 1886

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/68680

Credits: Turgut Dincer, SF2001, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAUSANIAS' DESCRIPTION OF GREECE, VOLUME II. ***

_BOHN’S CLASSICAL LIBRARY._

PAUSANIAS’ DESCRIPTION OF GREECE.




PAUSANIAS’

DESCRIPTION OF GREECE,

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH

WITH NOTES AND INDEX

BY ARTHUR RICHARD SHILLETO, M.A.,

_Sometime Scholar of Trinity College, Cambridge_.


VOLUME II.


“Pausanias est un homme qui ne manque ni de bon sens ni de
bonne foi, mais qui croit ou au moins voudrait croire à ses dieux.”
--Champagny.


 LONDON: GEORGE BELL AND SONS,
 YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
 1886.


CHISWICK PRESS:--C. WHITTINGHAM AND CO., TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE.




CONTENTS.


                         PAGE
 Book VII. Achaia           1
     VIII. Arcadia         61
       IX. Bœotia         151
        X. Phocis         219
           Index          299




ERRATA.


  Volume I.  Page 8, line 37, for “Atte” read “Attes.” As vii. 17, 20.
               (Catullus’ _Attis_.)
             Page 150, line 22, for “Auxesias” read “Auxesia.”
               As ii. 32.
             Page 165, lines 12, 17, 24, for “Philhammon”
               read “Philammon.”
             Page 191, line 4, for “Tamagra” read “Tanagra.”
             Page 215, line 35, for “Ye now enter” read “Enter ye now.”
             Page 227, line 5, for “the Little Iliad”
               read “_The Little Iliad_.”
             Page 289, line 18, for “the Babylonians” read “Babylon.”

  Volume II. Page 61, last line, for “earth” read “Earth.”
             Page 95, line 9, for “Camira” read “Camirus.”
             Page 169, line 1, for “and” read “for.”
             ---- ---- line 2, for “other kinds of flutes”
               read “other flutes.”
             Page 201, line 9, for “Lacenian” read “Laconian.”
             Page 264, line 10, for “Chilon” read “Chilo.” As iii. 16.
             Page 268, Note, for “I iad” read “Iliad.”




PAUSANIAS.

BOOK VII.--ACHAIA.




CHAPTER I.


Now the country between Elis and Sicyonia which borders on the
Corinthian Gulf is called in our day Achaia from its inhabitants, but
in ancient times was called Ægialus and its inhabitants Ægialians,
according to the tradition of the Sicyonians from Ægialeus, who was
king of what is now Sicyonia, others say from the position of the
country which is mostly on the sea-shore.[1] After the death of Hellen
his sons chased their brother Xuthus out of Thessaly, accusing him of
having privately helped himself to their father’s money. And he fled to
Athens, and was thought worthy to marry the daughter of Erechtheus, and
he had by her two sons Achæus and Ion. After the death of Erechtheus he
was chosen to decide which of his sons should be king, and, because he
decided in favour of Cecrops the eldest, the other sons of Erechtheus
drove him out of the country: and he went to Ægialus and there lived
and died. And of his sons Achæus took an army from Ægialus and Athens
and returned to Thessaly, and took possession of the throne of his
ancestors, and Ion, while gathering together an army against the
Ægialians and their king Selinus, received messengers from Selinus
offering him his only child Helice in marriage, and adopting him as his
son and heir. And Ion was very well contented with this, and after the
death of Selinus reigned over the Ægialians, and built Helice which
he called after the name of his wife, and called the inhabitants
of Ægialus Ionians after him. This was not a change of name but an
addition, for they were called the Ionian Ægialians. And the old name
Ægialus long prevailed as the name of the country. And so Homer in his
catalogue of the forces of Agamemnon was pleased to call the country by
its old name,

 “Throughout Ægialus and spacious Helice.”[2]

And at that period of the reign of Ion when the Eleusinians were at
war with the Athenians, and the Athenians invited Ion to be Commander
in Chief, death seized him in Attica, and he was buried at Potamos,
a village in Attica. And his descendants reigned after him till they
and their people were dispossessed by the Achæans, who in their turn
were driven out by the Dorians from Lacedæmon and Argos. The mutual
feuds between the Ionians and Achæans I shall relate when I have
first given the reason why, before the return of the Dorians, the
inhabitants of Lacedæmon and Argos only of all the Peloponnese were
called Achæans. Archander and Architeles, the sons of Achæus, came to
Argos from Phthiotis and became the sons in law of Danaus, Architeles
marrying Automate, and Archander Scæa. And that they were sojourners in
Argos is shewn very clearly by the name Metanastes (_stranger_) which
Archander gave his son. And it was when the sons of Achæus got powerful
in Argos and Lacedæmon that the name Achæan got attached to the whole
population. Their general name was Achæans, though the Argives were
privately called Danai. And now when they were expelled from Argos and
Lacedæmon by the Dorians, they and their king Tisamenus the son of
Orestes made the Ionians proposals to become their colonists without
war. But the Ionian Court was afraid that, if they and the Achæans were
one people, Tisamenus would be chosen as king over both nations for
his bravery and the lustre of his race. So the Ionians did not accept
the proposals of the Achæans but went to blows over it, and Tisamenus
fell in the battle, and the Achæans beat the Ionians, and besieged
them in Helice to which they had fled, but afterwards let them go upon
conditions. And the Achæans buried the body of Tisamenus at Helice,
but some time afterwards the Lacedæmonians, in accordance with an
oracle from Delphi, removed the remains to Sparta, and the tomb of
Tisamenus is now where the Lacedæmonians have their banquetings, at
the place called Phiditia. And when the Ionians migrated to Attica the
Athenians and their king, Melanthus the son of Andropompus, welcomed
them as settlers, in gratitude to Ion and his services to the Athenians
as Commander in Chief. But there is a tradition that the Athenians
suspected the Dorians, and feared that they would not keep their hands
off them, and received the Ionians therefore as settlers rather from
their formidable strength than from goodwill to them.

[1] Ægialus (αἰγιαλός) is Greek for sea-shore. In this last
view compare the names _Pomerania_, _Glamorganshire_.

[2] Iliad, ii. 575.




CHAPTER II.


And not many years afterwards Medon and Nileus, the eldest sons of
Codrus, quarrelled as to who should be king over the Athenians, and
Nileus said he would not submit to the rule of Medon, because Medon
was lame in one of his feet. But as they decided to submit the matter
to the oracle at Delphi, the Pythian Priestess assigned the kingdom to
Medon. So Nileus and the other sons of Codrus were sent on a colony,
and took with them whatever Athenians wished, and the Ionians formed
the largest part of the contingent. This was the third expedition
that had started from Greece under different kings and with different
peoples. The oldest expedition was that of Iolaus the Theban, the
nephew of Hercules, who led the Athenians and people of Thespiæ to
Sardinia. And, one generation before the Ionians sailed from Athens,
the Lacedæmonians and Minyæ who had been expelled by the Pelasgi
from Lemnos were led by Theras the Theban, the son of Autesion, to
the island henceforward called Theras after him, but formerly called
Calliste. And now thirdly the sons of Codrus were put at the head of
the Ionians, though they had no connection with them by race, being
as they were Messenians from Pylos as far as Codrus and Melanthus
were concerned, and Athenians only on their mother’s side. And the
following Greeks took part in this expedition of the Ionians, the
Thebans under Philotas, who was a descendant of Peneleus, and the
Minyæ from Orchomenus, who were kinsmen of the sons of Codrus. All the
Phocians also took part in it (except the people of Delphi), and the
Abantes from Eubœa. And to the Phocians the Athenians Philogenes and
Damon, the sons of Euctemon, gave ships to sail in, and themselves
led them to the colony. And when they had crossed over to Asia Minor,
different detachments went to different maritime towns, but Nileus and
his contingent to Miletus. The Milesians give the following account of
their early history. They say their country was for two generations
called Anactoria, during the reigns of Anax the Autochthon and Asterius
his son, and that, when Miletus put in there with an expedition of
Cretans, then the town and country changed its name to Miletus from
him. And Miletus and the force with him came from Crete fleeing from
Minos the son of Europa. And the Carians, who had settled earlier in
the neighbourhood of Miletus, admitted the Cretans to a joint share
with them. But now when the Ionians conquered the old inhabitants of
Miletus, they slew all the males except those that ran away from the
captured city, and married their wives and daughters. And the tomb of
Nileus is as you approach Didymi, not far from the gates on the left of
the road. And the temple and oracle of Apollo at Didymi are of earlier
date than the migration of the Ionians: as also is the worship of the
Ephesian Artemis. Not that Pindar in my opinion understood all about
the goddess, for he says that the Amazons who fought against Theseus
and Athens built the temple to her. Those women from Thermodon did
indeed sacrifice to the Ephesian Artemis, as having known her temple
of old, when they fled from Hercules and earlier still from Dionysus,
and sought refuge there: it was not however built by them, but by
Coresus, an Autochthon, and by Ephesus (who was they think the son of
the river Cayster, and gave his name to the city of Ephesus). And the
Leleges (who form part of Caria) and most of the Lydians inhabited the
district. And several people lived near the temple for the purpose of
supplication, and some women of the Amazonian race. And Androclus the
son of Codrus, who was appointed king of the Ionians that sailed to
Ephesus, drove the Leleges and Lydians who dwelt in the upper part of
the city out of the district; but of those who lived near the temple
no apprehensions were entertained, but they mutually gave and received
pledges with the Ionians without any hostilities. Androclus also took
Samos from the Samians, and for some time the Ephesians were masters of
Samos and the adjacent islands. And after the Samians returned to their
own possessions, Androclus assisted the people of Priene against the
Carians and, though the Greeks were victorious, fell in the battle. And
the Ephesians took up his corpse, and buried it in their own country
where the tomb is shewn to this day, on the way from the temple by the
Olympiæum to the Magnesian gates. The device on the tomb is a man in
full armour.

And the Ionians, when they inhabited Myus and Priene, drove the Carians
out from those cities. Cyaretus the son of Codrus colonized Myus, and
Priene was colonized by Thebans and Ionians mixed under Philotas, the
descendant of Peneleus, and Æpytus the son of Nileus. So Priene, which
had been ravaged by Tabalus the Persian, and afterwards by Hiero one
of its own citizens, at last became an Ionian city. But the dwellers
in Myus left their town in consequence of the following circumstance.
In the neighbourhood of Myus is a small bay: this was converted into
a marsh by the Mæander filling up the mouth of the bay with mud. And
as the water became foul and no longer sea, mosquitoes in endless
quantities bred in the marsh, till they compelled the poor people of
Myus to leave the place. And they went to Miletus and carried off with
them everything they could take and the statues of the gods: and in my
time there was at Myus only a temple of Dionysus in white marble. A
similar disaster fell upon the Atarnitæ near Pergamum.




CHAPTER III.


The Colophonians also regard the temple and oracle of Apollo at Claros
as most ancient, for, while the Carians were still in possession of the
country, they say that the first Greeks who came there were Cretans,
a large force powerful both by land and sea under Rhacius, and the
Carians remained still in possession of most of the country. But when
the Argives and Thersander the son of Polynices took Thebes, several
captives, and among others Manto were taken to Apollo at Delphi, but
Tiresias died on the road not far from Haliartus.[3] And when the
god sent them to form a colony they crossed over into Asia Minor,
and when they got to Claros the Cretans attacked them and took them
before Rhacius. And he, understanding from Manto who they were and
their errand, married Manto and made her companions fellow-settlers
with him. And Mopsus, the son of Rhacius and Manto, drove out all
the Carians altogether. And the Ionians on mutual conditions became
fellow-citizens upon equal terms with the Colophonian Greeks. And the
kingdom over the Ionians was usurped by their leaders Damasichthon and
Promethus the sons of Codrus. And Promethus afterwards slew his brother
Damasichthon and fled to Naxos, and died there, and his body was taken
home and buried by the sons of Damasichthon: his tomb is at a place
called Polytichides. And how Colophon came to be dispeopled I have
previously described in my account about Lysimachus: its inhabitants
were the only colonists at Ephesus that fought against Lysimachus and
the Macedonians. And the tombs of those from Colophon and Smyrna that
fell in the battle are on the left of the road to Claros.

Lebedus also was dispeopled by Lysimachus simply to add to the
population of Ephesus. It was a place in many respects favoured, and
especially for its very numerous and agreeable warm baths near the sea.
Originally it was inhabited by the Carians, till Andræmon, the son of
Codrus, and the Ionians drove them out. Andræmon’s tomb is on the left
of the road from Colophon, after you have crossed the river Calaon.

And Teos was colonized by the Minyæ from Orchomenus, who came with
Athamas; he is said to have been a descendant of Athamas the son of
Æolus. Here too the Carians were mixed up with the Greeks. And the
Ionians were conducted to Teos by Apœcus, the great-great-grandson of
Melanthus, who did no harm to either the Orchomenians or Teians. And
not many years afterwards came men from Attica and Bœotia, the former
under Damasus and Naoclus the sons of Codrus, the latter under the
Bœotian Geres, and both these new-comers were hospitably received by
Apœcus and the people of Teos.

The Erythræi also say that they came originally from Crete with
Erythrus (the son of Rhadamanthys) who was the founder of their city,
and when the Lycians Carians and Pamphylians occupied the city as well
as the Cretans, (the Lycians being kinsfolk of the Cretans, having
originally come from Crete when they fled from Sarpedon, and the
Carians having an ancient friendship with Minos, and the Pamphylians
also having Greek blood in their veins, for after the capture of Ilium
they wandered about with Calchas), when all those that I have mentioned
occupied Erythræ, Cleopus the son of Codrus gathered together from all
the towns in Ionia various people, whom he formed into a colony at
Erythræ.

And the people of Clazomenæ and Phocæa had no cities before the Ionians
came to Asia Minor: but when the Ionians arrived a detachment of them,
not knowing their way about the country, sent for one Parphorus a
Colophonian as their guide, and having built a city under Mount Ida
left it not long after, and returned to Ionia and built Scyppius in
Colophonia. And migrating of their own accord from Colophonia, they
occupied the territory which they now hold, and built on the mainland
the town of Clazomenæ. But afterwards from fear of the Persians they
crossed over into the island opposite. But in process of time Alexander
the son of Philip was destined to convert Clazomenæ into a peninsula,
by connecting the island with the mainland by an embankment. Most of
the inhabitants of Clazomenæ were not Ionians, but were from Cleonæ
and Phlius, and had left those cities when the Dorians returned to the
Peloponnese. And the people of Phocæa were originally from the country
under Mount Parnassus which is still to our day called Phocis, and
crossed over into Asia Minor with the Athenians Philogenes and Damon.
And they took territory not by war but on an understanding with the
people of Cyme. And as the Ionians would not receive them into the
Pan-Ionic confederacy unless they received kings from the descendants
of Codrus, they accepted from Erythræ and Teos Deœtes and Periclus and
Abartus.

[3] See Book ix. ch. 33.




CHAPTER IV.


And the cities of the Ionians in the islands were Samos near Mycale,
and Chios opposite Mimas. The Samian Asius, the son of Amphiptolemus,
has written in his poems that Phœnix had by Perimede (the daughter of
Œneus) Astypalæa and Europe, and that Poseidon had by Astypalæa a son
Ancæus, who was king over the Leleges, and married the daughter of the
river-god Mæander, her name was Samia, and their children were Perilaus
and Enudus and Samos and Alitherses and one daughter Parthenope, who
bare Lycomedes to Apollo. Such is the account of Asius in his poems.
Those who inhabited Samos at this time received the Ionian colonists
rather of necessity than goodwill. The Ionian leader was Procles the
son of Pityreus, an Epidaurian as also was a large number of his men,
they had been banished from Epidauria by Deiphontes and the Argives,
and Procles himself was a descendant of Ion the son of Xuthus. And
Androclus and the Ephesians marched against Leogorus the son of
Procles, who succeeded his father as king of Samos, and having defeated
him in battle drove the Samians out of the island, on the pretext that
they had joined the Carians in a plot against the Ionians. Of the
Samians that were thus driven out of Samos some took a colony to the
island near Thrace, which had been previously known as Dardania, but
was henceforth called Samothrace; others under Leogorus built a fort on
the mainland opposite at Anæa, and ten years afterwards crossed into
Samos, drove out the Ephesians and recovered the island.

The temple of Hera in Samos was according to the tradition of some
built by the Argonauts, who brought the statue of the goddess from
Argos. But the Samians themselves think that the goddess was born
in their island on the banks of the river Imbrasus, and under the
willow-tree that still grows in the temple of Hera. That this temple
could not have been very ancient one naturally infers from the
statue, which is by the Æginetan Smilis, the son of Euclides, who was
a contemporary of Dædalus, but has not acquired equal renown. For
Dædalus, an Athenian of the royal stock called Metionidæ, was most
remarkable of all men for his art and misfortunes. For having killed
his sister’s son, and knowing the vengeance that awaited him in his
country, he became a voluntary exile and fled to Minos and Crete, and
made works of art for Minos and his daughters, as Homer has described
in the Iliad. But being condemned for treason against Minos, and thrown
into prison with his son, he escaped from Crete and went to Inycus,
a city of Sicily, to the court of Cocalus, and caused a war between
the Sicilians and Cretans, because Cocalus would not give him up at
the request of Minos. And so much beloved was he by the daughters of
Cocalus for his art, that these ladies entered into a plot against the
life of Minos out of favour to Dædalus. And it is plain that his fame
extended over all Sicily, and most of Italy. While Smilis, except among
the Samians and at Elea, had no fame whatever out of his own country;
but he went to Samos, and there he made the statue of Hera.

About Chios Ion the Tragedian has recorded that Poseidon went to that
island when it was unoccupied, and had an intrigue there with a Nymph,
and when she was in labour some snow fell, and so Poseidon called the
boy Chios.[4] By another Nymph he had Agelus and Melas. And in process
of time Œnopion sailed to Chios from Crete with his sons Talus and
Euanthes and Melas and Salagus and Athamas. And during the reign of
Œnopion some Carians came to the island, and the Abantes from Eubœa.
And Œnopion and his sons were succeeded by Amphiclus, who came to Chios
from Histiæa in Eubœa in accordance with the oracle at Delphi. And
Hector the fourth in descent from Amphiclus, (for he too was king of
Chios), fought against the Abantes and Carians that were still in the
island, and slew some in various battles, and compelled others to leave
the island upon conditions of war. And after the Chians had finished
the war, then Hector bethought him that he and the Ionians ought to
jointly sacrifice to the welfare of the Pan-Ionic league. And Ion says
he received the present of a tripod from the community of the Ionians
for his prowess. But Ion has not told us how it was the Chians got
ranked as Ionians.

[4] The Greek for snow is _chion_. Hence the paronomasia.




CHAPTER V.


And Smyrna, which was one of the 12 cities of the Æolians, on the site
of what they now call the old city, was taken from the Æolians by the
Ionians who came from Colophon, but some time afterwards the Ionians
admitted its inhabitants to the Pan-Ionic league. But Alexander the
son of Philip built the modern Smyrna in consequence of a dream he
had. For on his return from hunting on Mount Pagus he went they say
to the temple of Nemesis, and there found a well, and a plane-tree in
front of the temple growing in the water. And they say he slept under
this plane-tree and the goddesses of Nemesis appeared to him and bade
him build a town on that site, and remove the people of Smyrna there
from the old Smyrna. And the people of Smyrna sent envoys to Claros to
consult the oracle in the present conjuncture, and the god gave the
following oracular response,

 “Thrice happy yea four times happy shall those men be, who shall dwell
 near Mount Pagus across the sacred Meles.”

So they willingly removed, and they worship two Nemeses instead of one,
and they say their mother was Night, but the Athenians who worship
Nemesis at Rhamnus say that she was the daughter of Oceanus.

The Ionians have a most magnificent country for the fruits of the
earth, and temples such as there are nowhere else, the finest that
of Ephesian Artemis for size and opulence, and next two to Apollo
not quite finished, one at Branchidæ in Milesia, the other at Claros
in Colophonia. Two temples in Ionia were burnt down by the Persians,
one of Hera in Samos, and one of Athene in Phocæa. They are still
wonderful though the fire has passed upon them. And you would be
delighted with the temple of Hercules at Erythræ, and with the temple
of Athene at Priene, the latter for the statue of the goddess, the
former for its great antiquity. And at Erythræ is a work of art
unlike the most ancient of Æginetan or Attic workmanship: its design
is perfect Egyptian. It is the wooden raft on which the god sailed
from Tyre in Phœnicia, why the people of Erythræ do not say. But to
prove that it came into the Ionian sea they say it was moored at the
promontory called Mid, which is on the mainland about half-way from the
harbour of Erythræ to the island of Chios. And when this raft was at
the promontory, the people of Erythræ and the Chians too had no small
trouble in trying to get it on shore. At last a native of Erythræ, who
got his living from the sea by catching fish, but had lost his eyesight
through some disease, Phormio by name, dreamed that the women of
Erythræ were to cut off their hair, and that the men making a rope out
of this hair were to drag the raft ashore. The women who were citizens
wouldn’t hear of it: but all the women who were slaves of Thracian
race, or who being free had yet to earn their own living, allowed their
hair to be cut off, and so at last the people of Erythræ got the raft
to shore. So Thracian women alone are allowed to enter the temple of
Hercules, and the rope made of hair is still kept by the people of
Erythræ. They also say that the fisherman recovered his sight, and
saw for the rest of his life. At Erythræ there is also a temple of
Athene Polias, and a huge wooden statue of the goddess seated on a
throne, in one hand a distaff in the other a globe. We conjecture it
to be by Endœus from several circumstances, especially looking at the
workmanship of the statue inside, and the Graces and Seasons in white
marble, which used to stand in the open air. The people of Smyrna also
had in my time a temple of Æsculapius between the mountain Coryphe and
the sea which is unmixed with any other water.

Ionia besides the temples and the salubrity of the air has several
other things worthy of record. Near Ephesus is the river Cenchrius,
and the fertile Mount Pion, and the well Halitæa. And in Milesia is
the well Biblis: of the love passages of Biblis they still sing. And
in Colophonia is the grove of Apollo, consisting of ash trees, and not
far from the grove the river Ales, the coldest river in Ionia. And
the people of Lebedus have baths which are both wonderful and useful
to men. The people of Teos also have baths at the promontory Macria,
some natural consisting of sea-water that bursts in at a crevice of
the rock, others built at wonderful cost. The people of Clazomenæ also
have baths. Agamemnon is honoured there. And there is a grotto called
the grotto of Pyrrhus’ mother, and they have a tradition about Pyrrhus
as a shepherd. The people of Erythræ have also a place called Chalcis,
from which the third of their tribes takes its name, where there is a
promontory extending to the sea, and some sea baths, which of all the
baths in Ionia are most beneficial to men. And the people of Smyrna
have the most beautiful river Meles and a cave near its springs, where
they say Homer wrote his Poems. The Chians also have a notable sight in
the tomb of Œnopion, about whose deeds they have several legends. The
Samians too on the way to the temple of Hera have the tomb of Rhadine
and Leontichus, which those are accustomed to visit who are melancholy
through love. The wonderful things indeed in Ionia are not far short of
those in Greece altogether.




CHAPTER VI.


After the departure of the Ionians the Achæans divided their land
and lived in their towns, which were 12 in number, and well known
throughout Greece. Dyme first near Elis, and then Olenus, and Pharæ,
and Tritea, and Rhypes, and Ægium, and Cerynea, and Bura, and Helice,
and Ægæ and Ægira, and last Pellene near Sicyonia. In these towns,
which had formerly been inhabited by the Ionians, the Achæans and
their kings dwelt. And those who had the greatest power among the
Achæans were the sons of Tisamenus, Däimenes and Sparton and Tellis and
Leontomenes. Cometes, the eldest of Tisamenus’ sons, had previously
crossed over into Asia Minor. These ruled over the Achæans as also
Damasias (the son of Penthilus, the son of Orestes), the brother of
Tisamenus. Equal authority to them had Preugenes and his son Patreus
from Lacedæmon; who were allowed by the Achæans to build a city in
their territory, which was called Patræ after Patreus.

The following were the wars of the Achæans. In the expedition of
Agamemnon against Ilium, as they inhabited both Lacedæmon and Argos,
they were the largest contingent from Greece. But when Xerxes and
the Medes invaded Greece, the Achæans as far as we know did not
join Leonidas at the pass of Thermopylæ, nor did they fight under
Themistocles and the Athenians in the sea-fights off Eubœa and Salamis,
nor were they in either the Lacedæmonian or Athenian list of allies.
They were also behind at Platæa: for otherwise they would certainly
have been mentioned among the other Greeks on the basement of the
statue of Zeus at Olympia.[5] I cannot but think they stayed behind
on each of these occasions to save their country, and also after the
Trojan War they did not think it befitting that the Lacedæmonians (who
were Dorians) should lead them. As they showed long afterwards. For
when the Lacedæmonians were at war with the Athenians, the Achæans
readily entered into an alliance with the people of Patræ, and were
equally friendly with the Athenians. And they took part in the wars
that were fought afterwards by Greece, as at Chæronea against Philip
and the Macedonians. But they admit that they did not go into Thessaly
or take part in the battle of Lamia, because they had not yet recovered
from their reverse in Bœotia. And the Custos Rotulorum at Patræ says
that the wrestler Chilon was the only Achæan present at the action at
Lamia. I know also myself that the Lydian Adrastus fought privately
(and not in any concert with the Lydians) for the Greeks. This Adrastus
had a brazen effigy erected to him by the Lydians in front of the
temple of Persian Artemis, and the inscription they wrote upon it
was that he died fighting for the Greeks against Leonnatus. And the
pass at Thermopylæ that admitted the Galati was overlooked by all the
Peloponnesians as well as by the Achæans: for as the barbarians had
no ships, they thought they had nothing to fear from them, if they
strongly fortified the Isthmus of Corinth, from Lechæum on the one sea
to Cenchreæ on the other.

This was the view at that time of all the Peloponnesians. And when the
Galati crossed over into Asia Minor in ships got somewhere or other,
then the Greeks were so situated that none of them were any longer
clearly the leading state. For as to the Lacedæmonians, their reverse
at Leuctra, and the gathering of the Arcadians at Megalopolis, and the
vicinity of the Messenians on their borders, prevented their recovering
their former prosperity. And the city of the Thebans had been so laid
waste by Alexander, that not many years afterwards when they were
reduced by Cassander, they were unable to protect themselves at all.
And the Athenians had indeed the good will of all Greece for their
famous actions, but that was no security to them in their war with the
Macedonians.

[5] See Book v. ch. 23.




CHAPTER VII.


The Achæans were most powerful in the days when the Greeks were not
banded together, but each looked after their own personal interests.
For none of their towns except Pellene had any experience of tyrants
at any time. And misfortunes from wars and the plague did not so much
touch the Achæans as all the other Greeks. Accordingly what is called
the Achæan League was by common consent the design and act of the
Achæans. And this League was formed at Ægium because, next to Helice
which had been swept away by a flood, it had been the foremost town in
Achaia in former times, and was at this time the most powerful. And
of the other Greeks the Sicyonians first joined this Achæan League.
And next to the Sicyonians some of the other Peloponnesians joined
it, some immediately, some rather later: and outside the Isthmus what
brought people in was seeing that the Achæan League was becoming more
and more powerful. And the Lacedæmonians were the only Greeks that
were unfriendly to the Achæans and openly took up arms against them.
For Pellene an Achæan town was taken by Agis, the son of Eudamidas,
King of Sparta, though he was soon driven out again by Aratus and
the Sicyonians. And Cleomenes, the son of Leonidas and grandson of
Cleonymus, a king of the other family, when Aratus and the Achæans were
gathered together at Dyme against him routed them badly in battle,
though he afterwards concluded peace with the Achæans and Antigonus.
Antigonus was at this time ruler of the Macedonians, being Regent for
Philip, the son of Demetrius, who was quite a boy; he was Philip’s
uncle and also stepfather. With him and the Achæans Cleomenes made
peace, but soon violated his engagements, and reduced to slavery
Megalopolis in Arcadia. And the reverse which the Lacedæmonians met
with at Sellasia at the hands of the Achæans and Antigonus was in
consequence of Cleomenes’ violation of his word. But Cleomenes we shall
mention again when we come to Arcadia. And Philip the son of Demetrius,
when he came to age, received the rule over the Macedonians from his
stepfather Antigonus, who was glad to surrender it, and inspired great
fear in all the Greeks by closely imitating Philip the son of Amyntas,
(who was no ancestor of his, but a true despot), as in bribing people
to betray their country. And at banquets he would offer the cup of
fellowship and kindness filled not with wine but deadly poison, a thing
which Philip the son of Amyntas in my opinion never thought of, but to
Philip the son of Demetrius poisoning appeared a very trifling crime.
And three towns he turned into garrison-towns as _points d’appui_
against Greece, and in his insolence and haughty disregard of the
Greeks he called these towns the keys of Greece. One was Corinth in the
Peloponnese, the citadel of which he strongly fortified, and for Eubœa
and Bœotia and Phocis he had Chalcis near the Euripus, and for Thessaly
and Ætolia he garrisoned Magnesia under Mount Pelion. And by perpetual
raids and plundering incursions he harassed the Athenians and Ætolians
especially. I have mentioned before in my account of Attica the Greeks
or barbarians who assisted the Athenians against Philip, and how in
consequence of the weakness of their allies the Athenians were obliged
to rely on an alliance with Rome. The Romans had sent some soldiers not
long before nominally to assist the Ætolians against Philip, but really
to spy out what the Macedonians were aiming at. But now they sent an
army under the command of Otilius, that was his best known name, for
the Romans are not called like the Greeks merely after their father’s
name, but have 3 names at least and sometimes more. This Otilius had
orders from the Romans to protect the Athenians and Ætolians against
Philip. Otilius in all other respects obeyed his orders, but did one
thing that the Romans were not pleased at. For he captured and rased
to the ground Hestiæa (a town in Eubœa) and Anticyra in Phocis, places
which had submitted to Philip simply from necessity. This was I think
the reason why the Senate when they heard of it superseded him by
Flaminius.




CHAPTER VIII.


Flaminius on his arrival immediately defeated the Macedonian garrison
at Eretria and plundered the town, and next marched to Corinth which
was occupied by Philip’s garrison, and sat down to a regular siege,
and sent to the Achæans urging them to come to Corinth with an army,
so as to be reckoned the allies of the Romans, and in friendship to
the Greeks generally. But the Achæans took it ill that Flaminius and
still earlier Otilius had handled so savagely old Greek cities, that
had committed no offence against Rome, and were under the Macedonians
against their wish. They foresaw also that instead of Philip and
the Macedonians they would merely have the Romans as dictators in
Greece. But after many speeches from different points of view had been
delivered in the council, at last the party friendly to the Romans
prevailed, and the Achæans joined Flaminius in the siege of Corinth.
And the Corinthians, being thus freed from the Macedonian yoke, at once
joined the Achæan League, which indeed they had formerly joined, when
Aratus and the Sicyonians drove out the garrison from the citadel of
Corinth and slew Persæus, who had been put in command of the garrison
by Antigonus. And from that time forward the Achæans were called the
allies of the Romans, and were devoted to them at all times, and
followed them into Macedonia against Philip, and joined them in an
expedition against the Ætolians, and fought on their side against
Antiochus and the Syrians.

In fighting against the Macedonians and Syrians the Achæans were
animated only by friendship to the Romans: but in fighting against the
Ætolians they were satisfying a long-standing grudge. And when the
power at Sparta of Nabis, a man of the most unrelenting cruelty, had
been overthrown, the Lacedæmonians became their own masters again, and
as time went on the Achæans got them into their League, and were very
severe with them, and rased to the ground the fortifications of Sparta,
which had been formerly run up hastily at the time of the invasion of
Demetrius and afterwards of Pyrrhus and the Epirotes, but during the
power of Nabis had been very strongly fortified. And not only did the
Achæans rase the walls of Sparta, but they prevented their youths from
training as Lycurgus had ordained, and made them train in the Achæan
way. I shall enter into all this in more detail in my account about
Arcadia. And the Lacedæmonians, being sorely vexed with these harassing
decrees of the Achæans, threw themselves into the arms of Metellus
and his colleagues, who had come on an embassy from Rome, not to try
and stir up war against Philip and the Macedonians, for a peace had
been previously solemnly concluded between Philip and the Romans, but
to try the charges made against Philip either by the Thessalians or
the Epirotes. Philip himself indeed and the Macedonian supremacy had
actually received a fatal blow from the Romans. For fighting against
Flaminius and the Romans on the range of hills called Cynoscephalæ
Philip got the worst of it, and having put forth all his strength in
the battle got so badly beaten that he lost the greater part of his
army, and was obliged by the Roman terms to remove his garrisons from
all the Greek towns which he had seized and reduced during the war.
The peace indeed with the Romans which he obtained sounded specious,
but was only procured by various entreaties and at great expenditure
of money. The Sibyl had indeed foretold not without the god the power
which the Macedonians would attain to in the days of Philip the son of
Amyntas, and how all this would crumble away in the days of another
Philip. These are the very words of her oracle--

 “Ye Macedonians, that boast in the Argeadæ as your kings, to you
 Philip as ruler shall be both a blessing and a curse. The first Philip
 shall make you ruler over cities and people, the last shall lose you
 all your honour, conquered by men both from the West and East.”

The Romans that overthrew the Macedonian Empire lived in the West of
Europe, and Attalus and the Mysian force that cooperated with them may
be said to have been Eastern Nations.




CHAPTER IX.


But now Metellus and his colleagues resolved not to neglect the
quarrels of the Lacedæmonians and Achæans, so they convened before
their council-board the most prominent Achæans, that they might
publicly advise them to treat the Lacedæmonians in a kindlier spirit.
And the Achæans returned answer that they would give no hearing to
them or anyone else, who should approach them on any subject whatever,
except they were armed with a decree from the Roman Senate. And
Metellus and his colleagues, thinking they were treated by the Achæans
with rather too much hauteur, on their return to Rome told the Senate
many things against the Achæans which were not all true. And further
charges still were brought against the Achæans by Areus and Alcibiades,
who were held in great repute at Sparta, but who did not act well
to the Achæans: for when they were exiled by Nabis the Achæans had
kindly received them, and after the death of Nabis had restored them
to Sparta contrary to the wish of the Lacedæmonian people. But now
being admitted before the Roman Senate they inveighed against the
Achæans with the greatest zeal. And the Achæans on their return from
Rome sentenced them to death in their Council. And the Roman Senate
sent Appius and some others to put the differences between the Achæans
and Lacedæmonians on a just footing. But this embassy was not likely
to please the Achæans, inasmuch as in Appius’ suite were Areus and
Alcibiades, whom the Achæans detested at this time. And when they
came into the council chamber they endeavoured by their words to
stir up rather the animosity of the Achæans than to win them over by
persuasion. Lycortas of Megalopolis, a man in merit behind none of the
Arcadians, and who had friendly relations with Philopœmen upon whom
he relied, put forward in his speech the just claims of the Achæans,
and at the same time covertly blamed the Romans. But Appius and his
suite jeered at Lycortas’ speech, and passed a vote that Areus and
Alcibiades had committed no crime against the Achæans, and allowed the
Lacedæmonians to send envoys to Rome, thus contravening the previous
convention between the Romans and Achæans. For it had been publicly
agreed that envoys of the Achæans might go to the Roman Senate, but
those states which were in the Achæan League were forbidden to send
envoys privately. And when the Achæans sent a counter-embassy to that
of the Lacedæmonians, and the speeches on both sides were heard in the
Senate, then the Romans despatched Appius and all his former suite
as plenipotentiaries between the Lacedæmonians and Achæans. And they
restored to Sparta those that had been exiled by the Achæans, and
they remitted the fines of those who had absconded before judgment,
and had been condemned in their absence. And they did not remove
the Lacedæmonians from the Achæan League, but they ordered that
_foreign_[6] courts were to try capital cases, but all other cases they
could themselves try, or submit them to the Achæan League. And the
Spartans again built walls all round their city from the foundation.
And those Lacedæmonians who were restored from exile meditated all
sorts of contrivances against the Achæans, hoping to injure them most
in the following way. The Messenians who were concerned in the death
of Philopœmen, and who were banished it was thought on that account by
the Achæans, these and other exiles of the Achæans they persuaded to
go and take their case to Rome. And they went with them and intrigued
for their return from exile. And as Appius greatly favoured the
Lacedæmonians, and on all occasions went against the Achæans, whatever
the Messenian or Achæan exiles wished was sure to come off without any
difficulty, and letters were sent by the Senate to Athens and Ætolia,
ordering them to restore the Messenians and Achæans to their rights.
This seemed the unkindest cut of all to the Achæans, who upon various
occasions were treated with great injustice by the Romans, and who
saw that all their past services went for nothing, for after having
fought against Philip and the Ætolians and Antiochus simply to oblige
the Romans, they were neglected for exiles whose lives were far from
pure. Still they thought they had better submit. Such was the state of
affairs up to this point.

[6] Meaning _Roman_ I take it.




CHAPTER X.


But the most impious of all crimes, the betrayal of one’s country and
fellow citizens for gain, was destined to bring about the destruction
of the Achæans, a crime that has ever troubled Greece. For in the
days of Darius (the son of Hystaspes) king of the Persians the Ionian
affairs were ruined by all the Samian captains but eleven treacherously
surrendering their ships. And after the subjugation of the Ionians the
Medes enslaved Eretria; when those held in highest repute in Eretria
played the traitor, as Philagras, the son of Cyneus, and Euphorbus,
the son of Alcimachus. And when Xerxes went on his expedition to
Greece, Thessaly was betrayed by the Aleuadæ, and Thebes was betrayed
by Attaginus and Timegenidas, its foremost men. And during the
Peloponnesian war Xenias, a native of Elis, endeavoured to betray Elis
to the Lacedæmonians and Agis. And those who were called Lysander’s
friends never ceased the attempt to betray their countries to Lysander.
And in the reign of Philip, the son of Amyntas, one will find that
Lacedæmon was not the only one of the Greek cities that were betrayed:
the cities of Greece were more ruined through treason than they had
been formerly by the plague. But Alexander the son of Philip had very
little success indeed by treason. And after the reverse to the Greeks
at Lamia Antipater, wishing to cross over with all despatch to the
war in Asia Minor, was content to patch up a peace speedily, as it
mattered nothing to him whether he left Athens or indeed all Greece
free. But Demades and other traitors at Athens persuaded Antipater
not to act friendly to the Greeks, and, by frightening the commonalty
of the Athenians, they were the means of the introduction into Athens
and most other towns of the Macedonian garrisons. What confirms my
account is that the Athenians after the reverse in Bœotia did not
become subject to Philip, though 1,000 were killed in the action, and
2,000 taken prisoners after: but at Lamia, although only 200 fell,
they became slaves of the Macedonians. Thus at no time were wanting to
Greece people afflicted with this itch for treason. And the Achæans at
this time were made subject to the Romans entirely through the Achæan
Callicrates. But the beginning of their troubles was the overthrow of
Perseus and the Macedonian Empire by the Romans.

Perseus the son of Philip was originally at peace with the Romans
according to the terms of agreement between them and his father Philip,
but he violated these conditions when he led an army against Abrupolis,
the king of the Sapæans, (who are mentioned by Archilochus in one of
his Iambic verses) and dispossessed them, though they were allies of
the Romans. And Perseus and the Macedonians having been beaten in
war on account of this outrage upon the Sapæans, ten Roman Senators
were sent to settle affairs in Macedonia according to the interests
of the Romans. And when they came to Greece Callicrates insinuated
himself among them, letting slip no occasion of flattering them either
in word or deed. And one of them, who was by no means remarkable for
justice, was so won over by Callicrates that he was persuaded by
him to enter the Achæan League. And he went to one of their general
meetings, and said that when Perseus was at war with the Romans the
most influential Achæans had furnished him with money, and assisted
him in other respects. He bade the Achæans therefore pass a sentence
of death against these men: and he said if they would do so, then he
would give them their names. This seemed an altogether unfair way of
putting it, and those present at the general meeting said that, if any
of the Achæans had acted with Perseus, their names must be mentioned
first, for it was not fair to condemn them before. And when the Roman
was thus confuted, he was so confident as to affirm that all the
Achæan Generals were implicated in the charge, for all were friendly
to Perseus and the Macedonians. This he said at the instigation of
Callicrates. And Xeno rose up next, a man of no small renown among
the Achæans, and spoke as follows. “As to this charge, I am a General
of the Achæans, and have neither acted against the Romans, nor shewn
any good will to Perseus. And I am ready to be tried on this charge
before either the Achæan League or the Romans.” This he said in the
boldness of a good conscience. But the Roman Senator at once seized
the opportunity his words suggested, and sent all whom Callicrates
accused of being friendly to Perseus to stand their trial at Rome.
Nothing of the kind had ever previously happened to the Greeks. For
the Macedonians in the zenith of their power, as under Philip, the son
of Amyntas, and Alexander, had never forced any Greeks who opposed
them to be sent into Macedonia, but had allowed them to be tried by
the Amphictyonic Council. But now every Achæan, however innocent, who
was accused by Callicrates, had to go to Rome, so it was decreed, and
more than 1,000 so went. And the Romans, treating them as if they had
been already condemned by the Achæans, imprisoned them in various
towns in Etruria, and, although the Achæans sent various embassies and
supplications about them, returned no answer. But 17 years afterwards
they released some 300 or even fewer, (who were all that remained in
Italy of the 1,000 and more Achæans), thinking they had been punished
sufficiently. And all those who escaped either on the journey to Rome
in the first instance, or afterwards from the towns to which they had
been sent by the Romans, were, if captured, capitally punished at once
and no excuse received.




CHAPTER XI.


And the Romans sent another Senator to Greece, Gallus by name, who
was sent to arbitrate on the disputes between the Lacedæmonians and
the Argives. This Gallus both spoke and acted with much hauteur
to the Greeks, and treated the Lacedæmonians and Argives with the
greatest contempt possible. For he disdained himself to arbitrate for
cities which had attained such great renown, and had fought for their
fatherland bravely and lavishly, and had previously submitted their
claims to no less an arbitrator than Philip the son of Amyntas, and
submitted the decision to Callicrates, the plague of all Greece. And
when the Ætolians who inhabit Pleuron came to Gallus, desiring release
from the Achæan League, they were allowed by him to send a private
embassy to Rome, and the Romans gave their consent to what they asked.
The Roman Senate also despatched to Gallus a decree, that he was at
liberty to release from the Achæan League as many towns as he liked.

And he carried out his orders, and meantime the Athenian people from
necessity rather than choice plundered Oropus which was a town subject
to them, for the Athenians had been reduced to a greater state of
poverty than any of the Greeks by the war with the Macedonians. The
Oropians appealed to the Senate at Rome, and they, thinking they
had not been treated well, ordered the Sicyonians to levy upon the
Athenians a fine proportionate to the harm they had done to the
Oropians. The Sicyonians, as the Athenians did not come into court
at the time of trial, fined them in their absence 500 talents, but
the Roman Senate at the request of the Athenians remitted all the
fine but 100 talents. And the Athenians did not pay even this, but
by promises and gifts prevailed upon the Oropians to agree, that an
Athenian garrison should occupy Oropus, and that the Athenians should
have hostages from the Oropians, and if the Oropians should bring
any further charges against the Athenians, then the Athenians were
to withdraw their garrison, and return their hostages. And no long
time elapsed when some of the garrison insulted some of the townsmen
of Oropus. They sent therefore envoys to Athens to demand back their
hostages, and at the same time to ask the Athenians to take away
their garrison according to their agreement. But the Athenians flatly
refused, on the plea that the outrage was committed by the garrison
and not the Athenian people, they promised however that those in
fault should be punished. And the Oropians appealed to the Achæans to
help them, but the Achæans refused out of friendship and respect to
the Athenians. Then the Oropians promised ten talents to Menalcidas,
a Lacedæmonian by birth but serving at this time as General of the
Achæans, if he would make the Achæans help them. And he promised half
the money to Callicrates, who because of his friendship with the Romans
had the greatest influence over the Achæans. And Callicrates responding
to the wishes of Menalcidas, it was determined to help the Oropians
against the Athenians. And some one announced news of this to the
Athenians, and they with all speed went to Oropus, and after plundering
whatever they had spared in former raids, withdrew their garrison.
And Menalcidas and Callicrates tried to persuade the Achæans who came
up too late for help, to make an inroad into Attica: but as they were
against it, especially those who had come from Lacedæmon, the army went
back again.




CHAPTER XII.


And the Oropians, though no help had come from the Achæans, yet had
to pay the money promised to Menalcidas. And he, when he had received
his bribe, thought it a misfortune that he would have to share any
part of it with Callicrates. So at first he practised putting off the
payment of the gift and other wiles, but soon afterwards he was so
bold as to deprive him of it altogether. My statement is confirmed
by the proverb, “One fire burns fiercer than another fire, and one
wolf is fiercer than other wolves, and one hawk flies swifter than
another hawk, since the most unscrupulous of all men, Callicrates, is
outdone in treachery by Menalcidas.” And Callicrates, who was never
superior to any bribe, and had got nothing out of his hatred to Athens,
was so vexed with Menalcidas that he deprived him of his office, and
prosecuted him on a capital charge before the Achæans, _viz._ that
he had tried to undermine the Achæans on his embassy to Rome, and
that he had endeavoured to withdraw Sparta from the Achæan league.
Menalcidas in this crisis gave 3 of the talents from Oropus to Diæus
of Megalopolis, who had been his successor as General of the Achæans,
and now, being zealous in his interest on account of his bribe, was
bent on saving Menalcidas in spite of the Achæans. But the Achæans
both privately and publicly were vexed with Diæus for the acquittal
of Menalcidas. But Diæus turned away their charges against him to the
hope of greater gain, by using the following wile as a pretext. The
Lacedæmonians had gone to the Senate at Rome about some debateable
land, and the Senate had told them to try all but capital cases before
the Achæan League. Such was their answer. But Diæus told the Achæans
what was not the truth, and deluded them by saying that the Roman
Senate allowed them to pass sentence of death upon a Spartan. They
therefore thought the Lacedæmonians could also pass sentence of life
and death on themselves: but the Lacedæmonians did not believe that
Diæus was speaking the truth, and wished to refer the matter to the
Senate at Rome. But the Achæans objected to this, that the cities
in the Achæan League had no right without common consent to send an
embassy privately to Rome. In consequence of these disputes war broke
out between the Achæans and the Lacedæmonians, and the Lacedæmonians,
knowing they were not able to fight the Achæans, sent embassies to
their cities and spoke privately to Diæus. All the cities returned
the same answer, that if their general ordered them to take the field
they could not disobey. For Diæus was in command, and he said that he
intended to fight not against Sparta but against all that troubled her.
And when the Spartan Senate asked who he thought were the criminals,
he gave them a list of 24 men who were prominent in Sparta. Thereupon
the opinion of Agasisthenes prevailed, a man previously held in good
repute, and who for the following advice got still more highly thought
of. He persuaded all those men whose names were mentioned to exile
themselves from Lacedæmon, and not by remaining there to bring on a
war on Sparta, and if they fled to Rome he said they would be soon
restored by the Romans. So they departed and were nominally tried
in their absence in the Spartan law-courts and condemned to death:
but Callicrates and Diæus were sent by the Achæans to Rome to plead
against these Spartan exiles before the Senate. And Callicrates died
on the road of some illness, nor do I know whether if he had gone on
to Rome he would have done the Achæans any good, or been to them the
source of greater evils. But Diæus carried on a bitter controversy
with Menalcidas before the Senate, not in the most decorous manner.
And the Senate returned answer that they would send Ambassadors, who
should arbitrate upon the differences between the Lacedæmonians and
Achæans. And the journey of these ambassadors from Rome was somehow
taken so leisurely, that Diæus had full time to deceive the Achæans,
and Menalcidas the Lacedæmonians. The Achæans were persuaded by Diæus
that the Lacedæmonians were directed by the Roman Senate to obey them
in all things. While Menalcidas deceived the Lacedæmonians altogether,
saying that they had been put by the Romans out of the jurisdiction of
the Achæan League altogether.




CHAPTER XIII.


In consequence of these differences with the Lacedæmonians the Achæans
made preparations again to go to war with them, and an army was
collected against Sparta by Damocritus, who was chosen General of
the Achæans at that time. And about the same time an army of Romans
under Metellus went into Macedonia, to fight against Andriscus, the
son of Perseus and grandson of Philip, who had revolted from the
Romans. And the war in Macedonia was finished by the Romans with
the greatest despatch. And Metellus gave his orders to the envoys,
who had been sent by the Roman Senate to see after affairs in Asia
Minor, to have a conference with the leaders of the Achæans before
they passed over into Asia Minor, and to forbid them to war against
Sparta, and to tell them they were to wait for the arrival from Rome
of the envoys who were despatched to arbitrate between them and the
Lacedæmonians. They gave these orders to Damocritus and the Achæans,
who were beforehand with them and had already marched to Lacedæmon, but
when they saw that the Achæans were not likely to pay any attention to
their orders, they crossed over into Asia Minor. And the Lacedæmonians,
out of spirit rather than from strength, took up arms and went out to
meet the enemy in defence of their country, but were in a short time
repulsed with the loss in the battle of about 1,000 who were in their
prime both in respect to age and bravery, and the rest of the army
fled pell mell into the town. And had Damocritus exhibited energy,
the Achæans might have pursued those who fled from the battle up to
the walls of Sparta: but he called them back from the pursuit at
once, and rather went in for raids and plundering than sat down to a
regular siege. He was therefore fined 50 talents by the Achæans as a
traitor for not following up his victory, and as he could not pay he
fled from the Peloponnese. And Diæus, who was chosen to succeed him
as General, agreed when Metellus sent a second message not to carry
on the war against the Lacedæmonians, but to wait for the arrival of
the arbitrators from Rome. After this he contrived another stratagem
against the Lacedæmonians: he won over all the towns round Sparta to
friendship with the Achæans, and introduced garrisons into them, so
as to make them _points d’appui_ against Sparta. And Menalcidas was
chosen by the Lacedæmonians as General against Diæus, and, as they were
badly off for all supplies of war and not least for money, and as their
soil had lain uncultivated, he persuaded them to violate the truce,
and took by storm and sacked the town Iasus, which was on the borders
of Laconia, but was at this time subject to the Achæans. And having
thus stirred up strife again between the Lacedæmonians and the Achæans
he was accused by the citizens, and, as he saw no hope of safety from
the danger that seemed imminent for the Lacedæmonians, he voluntarily
committed suicide by poison. Such was the end of Menalcidas, the most
imprudent General of the Lacedæmonians at this crisis, and earlier
still the most iniquitous person to the Achæans.




CHAPTER XIV.


At last the envoys, who had been sent from Rome to arbitrate between
the Lacedæmonians and Achæans, arrived in Greece, among others Orestes,
who summoned before him Diæus and the principal people in each city of
the Achæans. And when they came to his head-quarters,[7] he disclosed
to them all his views, _viz._ that the Roman Senate thought it just
that neither the Lacedæmonians nor Corinth should be forced into
the Achæan League, nor Argos, nor Heraclea under Mount Œta, nor the
Arcadians of Orchomenus, for they had no connection with the Achæans
by ancestry, but had been incorporated subsequently into the Achæan
League. As Orestes said this, the principal men of the Achæans would
not stay to listen to the end of his speech, but ran outside the
building and called the Achæans to the meeting. And they, when they
heard the decision of the Romans, immediately turned their fury on all
the Spartans who at that time resided at Corinth. And they plundered
everyone who they were sure was a Lacedæmonian, or whom they suspected
of being so by the way he wore his hair, or by his boots or dress
or name, and some who got the start of them, and fled for refuge to
Orestes’ head-quarters, they dragged thence by force. And Orestes
and his suite tried to check the Achæans from this outrage, and bade
them remember that they were acting outrageously against Romans. And
not many days afterwards the Achæans threw all the Lacedæmonians whom
they had arrested into prison, but dismissed all strangers whom they
had arrested on suspicion. And they sent Thearidas and several other
prominent Achæans as ambassadors to Rome, who after their departure
on meeting on the road some other envoys to settle the Lacedæmonian
and Achæan differences, who had been despatched later than Orestes,
turned back again. And after Diæus had served his time as General,
Critolaus was chosen as his successor by the Achæans; this Critolaus
was possessed with a grim unreasoning passion to fight against the
Romans, and, as the envoys from Rome to settle the disputes between
the Lacedæmonians and Achæans had just arrived, he went to Tegea in
Arcadia ostensibly to confer with them, but really because he did not
want the Achæans summoned to a general meeting, and, while in the
hearing of the Romans he sent messengers bidding the commissioners call
a general meeting of the Achæans, he privately urged the commissioners
not to attend the general meeting. And when the commissioners did
not come, then he displayed great guile to the Romans, for he told
them to wait for another general meeting of the Achæans that would be
held six months later, for he himself said that he could discuss no
question privately without the common consent of the Achæans. And the
Roman envoys, when they discovered they were being deceived, returned
to Rome. And Critolaus collected an army of Achæans at Corinth,
and persuaded them to war against Sparta, and also to wage war at
once against the Romans. When king and nation undertake war and are
unsuccessful, it seems rather the malignity of some divine power than
the fault of the originators of the war. But audacity and weakness
combined should rather be called madness than want of luck. And this
was the ruin of Critolaus and the Achæans. The Achæans were also
further incited against the Romans by Pytheas, who was at that time
Bœotarch at Thebes, and the Thebans undertook to take an eager part in
prosecuting the war. For the Thebans had been heavily punished by the
decision of Metellus, first they had to pay a fine to the Phocians for
invading Phocis, and secondly to the Eubœans for ravaging Eubœa, and
thirdly to the people of Amphissa for destroying their corn in harvest
time.

[7] Which were at Corinth, as we see in this chapter a little later.




CHAPTER XV.


And the Romans being informed of all this by the envoys whom they had
sent to Greece, and by the letters which Metellus wrote, passed a vote
against the Achæans that they were guilty of treason, and, as Mummius
had just been chosen consul, they ordered him to lead against them both
a naval and land force. And Metellus, directly he heard that Mummius
and the army with him had set out against the Achæans, made all haste
that he might win his laurels in the campaign first, before Mummius
could get up. He sent therefore messengers to the Achæans, bidding the
Lacedæmonians and all other cities mentioned by the Romans to leave
the Achæan League, and for the future he promised that there should
be no anger on the part of the Romans for any earlier disobedience.
At the same time that he made this Proclamation he brought his army
from Macedonia, marching through Thessaly and by the Lamiac Gulf. And
Critolaus and the Achæans, so far from accepting this proclamation
which tended to peace, sat down and blockaded Heraclea, because it
would not join the Achæan League. But when Critolaus heard from his
spies that Metellus and the Romans had crossed the Spercheus, then
he fled to Scarphea in Locris, not being bold enough to place the
Achæans in position between Heraclea and Thermopylæ, and there await
the attack of Metellus: for such a panic had seized him that he could
extract no hope from a spot where the Lacedæmonians had so nobly fought
for Greece against the Medes, and where at a later date the Athenians
displayed equal bravery against the Galati. And Metellus’ army came up
with Critolaus and the Achæans as they were in retreat a little before
Scarphea, and many they killed and about 1,000 they took alive. But
Critolaus was not seen alive after the battle, nor was he found among
the dead, but if he tried to swim across the muddy sea near Mount Œta,
he would have been very likely drowned without being observed. As to
his end therefore one may make various guesses. But the thousand picked
men from Arcadia, who had fought on Critolaus’ side in the action,
marched as far as Elatea in Phocis, and were received in that town
from old kinsmanship; but when the people of Phocis got news of the
reverse of Critolaus and the Achæans, they requested these Arcadians
to leave Elatea. And as they marched back to the Peloponnese Metellus
and the Romans met them at Chæronea. Then came the Nemesis of the Greek
gods upon the Arcadians, who were cut to pieces by the Romans, in the
very place where they had formerly left in the lurch the Greeks who
fought against Philip and the Macedonians.

And Diæus was again made Commander-in-Chief of the Achæan army, and he
imitated the action of Miltiades and the Athenians before Marathon by
manumitting the slaves, and made a levy of Achæans and Arcadians in
the prime of life from the various towns. And so his army altogether,
including the slaves, amounted to 600 cavalry, and 14,000 infantry.
Then he displayed the greatest want of strategy, for, though he knew
that Critolaus and all the Achæan host had crumbled away before
Metellus, yet he selected only 4,000 men, and put Alcamenes at their
head. They were despatched to Megara to garrison that town and, should
Metellus and the Romans come up, to stop their further progress. And
Metellus, after his rout of the Arcadian picked men at Chæronea, had
pushed on with his army to Thebes; for the Thebans had joined the
Achæans in besieging Heraclea, and had also taken part in the fight
near Scarphea. Then the inhabitants, men and women of all ages,
abandoned Thebes, and wandered about all over Bœotia, and fled to the
tops of the mountains. But Metellus would not allow his men either to
set on fire the temples of the gods or to pull down any buildings, or
to kill or take alive any of the fugitives except Pytheas, but him, if
they should capture him, they were to bring before him. And Pytheas
was forthwith found, and brought before Metellus, and executed. And
when the Roman army marched on Megara, then Alcamenes and his men were
seized with panic, and fled without striking a blow to Corinth, to the
camp of the Achæans. And the Megarians delivered up their town to the
Romans without a blow struck, and, when Metellus got to the Isthmus,
he issued a Proclamation, inviting the Achæans even now to peace and
harmony: for he had a strong desire that both Macedonia and Achaia
should be settled by him. But this intention of his was frustrated by
the folly of Diæus.




CHAPTER XVI.


Meantime Mummius, and with him Orestes, who was first sent from Rome
to settle the disputes between the Lacedæmonians and Achæans, reached
the Roman army one morning, took over the command, and sent Metellus
and his forces back to Macedonia, and himself waited at the Isthmus
till he had concentrated all his forces. His cavalry amounted to
3,500, his infantry to 22,000. There were also some Cretan bowmen, and
Philopœmen had brought some soldiers from Attalus, from Pergamus across
the Caicus. Mummius placed some of the Italian troops and allies, so
as to be an advanced post for all his army, 12 stades in the van. And
the Achæans, as this vanguard was left without defence through the
confidence of the Romans, attacked them, and slew some, but drove still
more back to the camp, and captured about 500 shields. By this success
the Achæans were so elated that they attacked the Roman army without
waiting for them to begin the battle. But when Mummius led out his army
to battle in turn, then the Achæan cavalry, which was opposite the
Roman cavalry, ran immediately, not venturing to make one stand against
the attack of the enemy’s cavalry. And the infantry, though dejected
at the rout of the cavalry, stood their ground against the wedge-like
attack of the Roman infantry, and though outnumbered and fainting under
their wounds, yet resisted bravely, till 1,000 picked men of the Romans
took them in flank, and so turned the battle into a complete rout of
the Achæans. And had Diæus been bold enough to hurry into Corinth after
the battle, and receive within its walls the runaways from the fight
and shut himself up there, the Achæans might have obtained better terms
from Mummius, if the war had been lengthened out by a siege. But as
it was, directly the Achæans gave way before the Romans, Diæus fled
for Megalopolis, exhibiting to the Achæans none of that spirit which
Callistratus, the son of Empedus, had displayed to the Athenians. For
he being in command of the cavalry in Sicily, when the Athenians and
their allies were badly defeated at the river Asinarus, boldly cut his
way through the enemy at the head of the cavalry, and, after getting
safe through with most of them to Catana, turned back again on the road
to Syracuse, and finding the enemy still plundering the camp of the
Athenians killed five with his own hand and then expired, himself and
his horse having received fatal wounds. He won fair fame both for the
Athenians and himself, and voluntarily met death, having preserved the
cavalry whom he led. But Diæus after ruining the Achæans announced to
the people of Megalopolis their impending ruin, and after slaying his
wife with his own hand that she might not become a captive took poison
and so died, resembling Menalcidas as in his greed for money so also in
the cowardice of his death.

And those of the Achæans who got safe to Corinth after the battle fled
during the night, as also did most of the Corinthians. But Mummius did
not enter Corinth at first, though the gates were open, as he thought
some ambush lay in wait for him within the walls, not till the third
day did he take Corinth in full force and set it on fire. And most of
those that were left in the city were slain by the Romans, and the
women and children were sold by Mummius, as also were the slaves who
had been manumitted and had fought on the side of the Achæans, and
had not been killed in action. And the most wonderful of the votive
offerings and other ornaments he carried off _to Rome_, and those of
less value he gave to Philopœmen, the general of Attalus’ troops, and
these spoils from Corinth were in my time at Pergamus. And Mummius
rased the walls of all the cities which had fought against the Romans,
and took away their arms, before any advisers what to do were sent from
Rome. And when they arrived, then he put down all democracies, and
appointed chief-magistrates according to property qualifications.[8]
And taxes were laid upon Greece, and those that had money were
forbidden to have land over the borders, and all the general meetings
were put down altogether, as those in Achaia, or Phocis, or Bœotia,
or any other part of Greece. But not many years afterwards the Romans
took mercy upon Greece, and allowed them their old national meetings
and to have land over the borders. They remitted also the fines which
Mummius had imposed, for he had ordered the Bœotians to pay the
people of Heraclea and Eubœa 100 talents, and the Achæans to pay the
Lacedæmonians 200 talents. The Greeks got remission of these fines from
the Romans, and a prætor was sent out from Rome, and is still, who is
not called by the Romans prætor of all Greece but prætor of Achaia,
because they reduced Greece through Achaia, which was then the foremost
Greek power. Thus ended the war when Antitheus was Archon at Athens, in
the 160th Olympiad, when Diodorus of Sicyon was victor in the course.

[8] That is, wherever Mummius found a democratical form of government,
there he established an oligarchy. Cf. Plat. _Rep._ 550. C. Id. _Legg._
698. B.




CHAPTER XVII.


At this time Greece was reduced to extreme weakness, being partially
ruined, and altogether reduced to great straits, by the deity. For
Argos, which had been a town of the greatest importance in the days
of the so-called heroes, lost its good fortune with the overthrow of
the Dorians. And the Athenians, who had survived the Peloponnesian
War and the plague, and had even lift up their heads again, were not
many years later destined to be subdued by the Macedonian power at its
height. From Macedonia also came down on Thebes in Bœotia the wrath of
Alexander. And the Lacedæmonians were first reduced by Epaminondas the
Theban, and afterwards by the war with the Achæans. And when Achaia
with great difficulty, like a tree that had received some early injury,
grew to great eminence in Greece, then the folly of its rulers stopped
its growth. And some time after the Empire of Rome came to Nero, and
he made Greece entirely free, and gave to the Roman people instead of
Greece the most fertile island of Sardinia. When I consider this action
of Nero I cannot but think the words of Plato the son of Aristo most
true, that crimes remarkable for their greatness and audacity are not
committed by everyday kind of people, but emanate from a noble soul
corrupted by a bad bringing up.[9] Not that this gift long benefited
Greece. For in the reign of Vespasian, who succeeded Nero, it suffered
from intestine discord, and Vespasian made the Greeks a second time
subject to taxes and bade them obey the prætor, saying that Greece
had unlearnt how to use liberty. Such are the particulars which I
ascertained.

The boundaries between Achaia and Elis are the river Larisus (near
which river there is a temple of Larissæan Athene), and Dyme, a town
of the Achæans, about 30 stades from the Larisus. Dyme was the only
town in Achaia that Philip the son of Demetrius reduced in war. And for
this reason Sulpicius, the Roman Prætor, allowed his army to plunder
Dyme. And Augustus afterwards assigned it to Patræ. In ancient days it
was called Palea, but when the Ionians were in possession of it they
changed its name to Dyme, I am not quite certain whether from some
woman of the district called Dyme, or from Dymas the son of Ægimius.
One is reduced to a little uncertainty about the name of the place also
by the Elegiac couplet at Olympia on the statue of Œbotas, a native of
Dyme, who in the 6th Olympiad was victor in the course, and in the 80th
Olympiad was declared by the oracle at Delphi worthy of a statue at
Olympia. The couplet runs as follows:

“Œbotas here the son of Œnias was victor in the course, and so
immortalized his native place Palea in Achaia.”

But there is no need for any real confusion from the town being called
in the inscription Palea and not Dyme, for the older names of places
are apt to be introduced by the Greeks into poetry, as they call
Amphiaraus and Adrastus the sons of Phoroneus, and Theseus the son of
Erechtheus.

And a little before you come to the town of Dyme there is on the right
of the way the tomb of Sostratus, who was a youth in the neighbourhood,
and they say Hercules was very fond of him, and as he died while
Hercules was still among men, Hercules erected his sepulchre and
offered to him the first fruits of his hair. There is also still a
device and pillar on the tomb and an effigy of Hercules on it. And I
was told that the natives still offer sacrifices to Sostratus.

There is also at Dyme a temple of Athene and a very ancient statue,
there is also a temple built to the Dindymene Mother and Attes. Who
Attes was I could not ascertain it being a mystery. But according to
the Elegiac lines of Hermesianax he was the son of Calaus the Phrygian,
and was born incapable of procreation. And when he grew up he removed
to Lydia, and celebrated there the rites of the Dindymene Mother, and
was so honoured that Zeus in jealousy sent a boar among the crops of
the Lydians. Thereupon several of the Lydians and Attes himself were
slain by this boar: and in consequence of this the Galati who inhabit
Pessinus will not touch pork. However this is not the universal
tradition about Attes, but there is a local tradition that Zeus in his
sleep dropt seed into the ground, and that in process of time there
sprang up a Hermaphrodite whom they called Agdistis; and the gods bound
this Agdistis and cut off his male privities. And an almond-tree sprang
from them and bare fruit, and they say the daughter of the river-god
Sangarius took of the fruit. And as she put some in her bosom the fruit
immediately vanished, and she became pregnant, and bare a boy, Attes,
who was exposed and brought up by a goat. And as the lad’s beauty was
more than human, Agdistis grew violently in love with him. And when he
was grown up his relations sent him to Pessinus to marry the king’s
daughter. And the wedding song was being sung when Agdistis appeared,
and Attes in his rage cut off his private parts, and his father in law
cut off his. Then Agdistis repented of his action towards Attes: and
some contrivance was found out by Zeus so that the body of Attes should
not decay nor rot. Such is the most notable legend about Attes.

At Dyme is also the tomb of the runner Œbotas. He was the first Achæan
who had won the victory at Olympia, and yet had received no especial
reward from his own people. So he uttered a solemn imprecation that
no Achæan might henceforth win the victory. And, as one of the gods
made it his business to see that the imprecation of Œbotas should be
valid, the Achæans learnt why they failed to secure victory at Olympia
by consulting the oracle at Delphi. Then they not only conferred other
honours upon Œbotas, but put up his statue at Olympia, after which
Sostratus of Pellene won the race for boys in the course. And even
now the custom prevails amongst the Achæans who intend to compete at
Olympia to offer sacrifices to Œbotas, and, if they are victorious, to
crown his statue at Olympia.

[9] See Plato _Rep._ vi. 491. E.




CHAPTER XVIII.


About 40 stades from Dyme the river Pirus discharges itself into the
sea, near which river the Achæans formerly had a town called Olenus.
Those who have written about Hercules and his doings have not dwelt
least upon Dexamenus the king of Olenus, and the hospitality Hercules
received at his court. And that Olenus was originally a small town is
confirmed by the Elegy written by Hermesianax on the Centaur Eurytion.
But in process of time they say the people of Olenus left it in
consequence of its weakness, and betook themselves to Piræ and Euryteæ.

About 80 stades from the river Pirus is the town of Patræ, not far
from which the river Glaucus discharges itself into the sea. The
antiquarians at Patræ say that Eumelus, an Autochthon, was the first
settler, and was king over a few subjects. And when Triptolemus came
from Attica Eumelus received from him corn to sow, and under his
instructions built a town called Aroe, which he so called from tilling
the soil. And when Triptolemus had gone to sleep they say Antheas, the
son of Eumelus, yoked the dragons to the chariot of Triptolemus, and
tried himself to sow corn: but he died by falling out of the chariot.
And Triptolemus and Eumelus built in common the town Anthea, which they
called after him. And a third city called Mesatis was built between
Anthea and Aroe. And the traditions of the people of Patræ about
Dionysus, that he was reared at Mesatis, and was plotted against by
the Titans there and was in great danger, and the explanation of the
name Mesatis, all this I leave to the people of Patræ to explain, as
I don’t contradict them. And when the Achæans drove the Ionians out
later, Patreus the son of Preugenes and grandson of Agenor forbade the
Achæans to settle at Anthea and Mesatis, but made the circuit of the
walls near Aroe wider so as to include all that town, and called it
Patræ after his own name. And Agenor the father of Preugenes was the
son of Areus the son of Ampyx, and Ampyx was the son of Pelias, the
son of Æginetus, the son of Deritus, the son of Harpalus, the son of
Amyclas the son of Lacedæmon. Such was the genealogy of Patreus. And
in process of time the people of Patræ were the only Achæans that went
into Ætolia from friendship to the Ætolians, to join them in their war
against the Galati. But meeting most serious reverses in battle, and
most of them suffering also from great poverty, they left Patræ all
but a few. And those who remained got scattered about the country and
followed the pursuit of agriculture, and inhabited the various towns
outside Patræ, as Mesatis and Anthea and Boline and Argyra and Arba.
And Augustus, either because he thought Patræ a convenient place on the
coast or for some other reason, introduced into it people from various
towns. He incorporated also with it the Achæans from Rhypæ, after first
rasing Rhypæ to the ground. And to the people of Patræ alone of all the
Achæans he granted their freedom, and gave them other privileges as
well, such as the Romans are wont to grant their colonists.

And in the citadel of Patræ is the temple of Laphrian Artemis: the
goddess has a foreign title, and the statue also is foreign. For
when Calydon and the rest of Ætolia was dispeopled by the Emperor
Augustus, that he might people with Ætolians his city of Nicopolis
near Actium, then the people of Patræ got this statue of Laphrian
Artemis. And as he had taken many statues from Ætolia and Acarnania
for his city Nicopolis, so he gave to the people of Patræ various
spoils from Calydon, and this statue of Laphrian Artemis, which even
now is honoured in the citadel of Patræ. And they say the goddess was
called Laphrian from a Phocian called Laphrius, the son of Castalius
and grandson of Delphus, who they say made the old statue of Artemis.
Others say that the wrath of Artemis against Œneus fell lighter upon
the people of Calydon when this title was given to the goddess. The
figure in the statue is a huntress, and the statue is of ivory and
gold, and the workmanship is by Menæchmus and Soidas. It is conjectured
that they were not much later than the period of Canachus the Sicyonian
or the Æginetan Callon. And every year the people of Patræ hold
the festival called Laphria to Artemis, in which they observe their
national mode of sacrifice. Round the altar they put wood yet green in
a circle, and pile it up about 16 cubits high. And the driest wood lies
within this circle on the altar. And they contrive at the time of the
festival a smooth ascent to the altar, piling up earth so as to form a
kind of steps. First they have a most splendid procession to Artemis,
in which the virgin priestess rides last in a chariot drawn by stags,
and on the following day they perform the sacrificial rites, which both
publicly and privately are celebrated with much zeal. For they place
alive on the altar birds good to eat and all other kinds of victims,
as wild boars and stags and does, and moreover the young of wolves and
bears, and some wild animals fully grown, and they place also upon the
altar the fruit of any trees that they plant. And then they set fire
to the wood. And I have seen a bear or some other animal at the first
smell of the fire trying to force a way outside, some even actually
doing so by sheer strength. But they thrust them back again into the
blazing pile. Nor do they record any that were ever injured by the
animals on these occasions.




CHAPTER XIX.


And between the temple of Laphria and the altar is the sepulchre of
Eurypylus. Who he was and why he came into this country I shall relate,
when I have first described the condition of things when he came into
these parts. Those of the Ionians who dwelt at Aroe and Anthea and
Mesatis had in common a grove and temple of Artemis Triclaria, and the
Ionians kept her festival annually all night long. And the priestess of
the goddess was a maiden, who was dismissed when she married. They have
a tradition that once the priestess of the goddess was one Comætho,
a most beautiful maiden, and that Melanippus was deeply in love with
her, who in all other respects and in handsomeness of appearance outdid
all of his own age. And as Melanippus won the maiden’s love as well,
he asked her in marriage of her father. It is somehow common to old
age to be in most respects the very antipodes to youth, and especially
in sympathy with love, so that Melanippus, who loved and was beloved,
got no encouragement either from his own parents or from the parents
of Comætho. And it is evident from various other cases as well as this
that love is wont to confound human laws, and even to upset the honour
due to the gods, as in this case, for Melanippus and Comætho satisfied
their ardent love in the very temple of Artemis, and afterwards made
the temple habitually their bridal-chamber. And forthwith the wrath
of Artemis came on the people of the country, their land yielded no
fruit, and unusual sicknesses came upon the people, and the mortality
was much greater than usual. And when they had recourse to the oracle
at Delphi, the Pythian Priestess laid the blame on Melanippus and
Comætho, and the oracle ordered them to sacrifice to Artemis annually
the most handsome maiden and lad. It was on account of this sacrifice
that the river near the temple of Triclaria was called Amilichus
(_Relentless_): it had long had no name. Now all these lads and maidens
had done nothing against the goddess but had to die for Melanippus and
Comætho, and they and their relations suffered most piteously. I do not
put the whole responsibility for this upon Comætho and Melanippus, for
to human beings alone is love felt worth life. These human sacrifices
are said to have been stopped for the following reason. The oracle at
Delphi had foretold that a foreign king would come to their country,
and that he would bring with him a foreign god, and that he would stop
this sacrifice to Artemis Triclaria. And after the capture of Ilium,
when the Greeks shared the spoil, Eurypylus the son of Euæmon got a
chest, in which there was a statue of Dionysus, the work some say of
Hephæstus, and a gift of Zeus to Dardanus. But there are two other
traditions about this chest, one that Æneas left it behind him when he
fled from Ilium, the other that it was thrown away by Cassandra as a
misfortune to any Greek who found it. However this may be, Eurypylus
opened the chest and saw the statue, and was driven out of his mind
by the sight. And most of his time he remained mad, though he came
to himself a little at times. And being in that condition he did not
sail to Thessaly, but to Cirrha and the Cirrhæan Gulf; and he went
to Delphi and consulted the oracle about his disorder. And they say
the oracle told him, where he should find people offering a strange
sacrifice, to dedicate his chest and there dwell. And the wind drove
Eurypylus’ ships to the sea near Aroe, and when he went ashore he saw
a lad and maiden being led to the altar of Artemis Triclaria. And he
saw at once that the oracle referred to this sacrifice, the people of
the place also remembered the oracle, seeing a king whom they had never
before seen, and as to the chest they suspected that there was some
god in it. And so Eurypylus got cured of his disorder, and this human
sacrifice was stopped, and the river was now called Milichus (_Mild_).
Some indeed have written that it was not the Thessalian Eurypylus to
whom what I have just recorded happened, but they want people to think
that Eurypylus (the son of Dexamenus who was king at Olenus), who
accompanied Hercules to Ilium, received the chest from Hercules. The
rest of their tradition is the same as mine. But I cannot believe that
Hercules was ignorant of the contents of this chest, or that if he
knew of them he would have given the chest as a present to a comrade.
Nor do the people of Patras record any other Eurypylus than the son of
Euæmon, and to him they offer sacrifices every year, when they keep the
festival to Dionysus.




CHAPTER XX.


The name of the god inside the chest is Æsymnetes. Nine men, who are
chosen by the people for their worth, look after his worship, and the
same number of women. And one night during the festival the priest
takes the chest outside the temple. That night has special rites. All
the lads in the district go down to the Milichus with crowns on their
heads made of ears of corn: for so used they in old time to dress up
those whom they were leading to sacrifice to Artemis. But in our day
they lay these crowns of ears of corn near the statue of the goddess,
and after bathing in the river, and again putting on crowns this time
of ivy, they go to the temple of Æsymnetes. Such are their rites on
this night. And inside the grove of Laphrian Artemis is the temple of
Athene called Pan-Achæis, the statue of the goddess is of ivory and
gold.

And as you go to the lower part of the city you come to the temple of
the Dindymene Mother, where Attes is honoured. They do not show his
statue, but there is one of the Mother wrought in stone. And in the
market-place there is a temple of Olympian Zeus, he is on his throne
and Athene is standing by it. And next Olympian Zeus is a statue of
Hera, and a temple of Apollo, and a naked Apollo in brass, and sandals
are on his feet, and one foot is on the skull of an ox. Alcæus has
shown that Apollo rejoices especially in oxen in the Hymn that he
wrote about Hermes, how Hermes filched the oxen of Apollo, and Homer
still earlier than Alcæus has described how Apollo tended the oxen of
Laomedon for hire. He has put the following lines in the Iliad into
Poseidon’s mouth.

“I was drawing a spacious and handsome wall round the city of the
Trojans, that it might be impregnable, while you, Phœbus, were tending
the slow-paced cows with the crumpled horns.”[10]

That is therefore one would infer the reason why the god is represented
with his foot on the skull of an ox. And in the market-place in the
open air is a statue of Athene, and in front of it is the tomb of
Patreus.

And next to the market-place is the Odeum, and there is a statue of
Apollo there well worth seeing, it was made from the spoil that the
people of Patræ got, when they alone of the Achæans helped the Ætolians
against the Galati. And this Odeum is beautified in other respects more
than any in Greece except the one at Athens: that excels this both in
size and in all its fittings, it was built by the Athenian Herodes
in memory of his dead wife. In my account of Attica I passed that
Odeum over, because that part of my work was written before Herodes
began building it. And at Patræ, as you go from the market-place
where the temple of Apollo is, there is a gate, and the device on
the gate consists of golden effigies of Patreus and Preugenes and
Atherion, all three companions and contemporaries. And right opposite
the market-place at this outlet is the grove and temple of Artemis
Limnatis. While the Dorians were already in possession of Lacedæmon and
Argos, they say that Preugenes in obedience to a dream took the statue
of Artemis Limnatis from Sparta, and that the trustiest of his slaves
shared with him in the enterprize. And that statue from Lacedæmon they
keep generally at Mesoa, because originally it was taken by Preugenes
there, but when they celebrate the festival of Artemis Limnatis, one
of the servants of the goddess takes the old statue from Mesoa to the
sacred precincts at Patræ: in which are several temples, not built in
the open air, but approached by porticoes. The statue of Æsculapius
except the dress is entirely of stone, that of Athene is in ivory and
gold. And in front of the temple of Athene is the tomb of Preugenes, to
whom they offer funereal rites as to Patreus annually, at the time of
the celebration of the feast to Artemis Limnatis. And not far from the
theatre are temples of Nemesis and Aphrodite: their statues are large
and of white marble.

[10] Iliad, xxi. 446-448.




CHAPTER XXI.


In this part of the city there is also a temple to Dionysus under the
title of Calydonian: because the statue of the god was brought from
Calydon. And when Calydon was still inhabited, among other Calydonians
who were priests to the god was one Coresus, who of all men suffered
most grievously from love. He was enamoured of the maiden Callirhoe,
but in proportion to the greatness of his love was the dislike of the
maiden to him. And as by all his wooing and promises and gifts the
maiden’s mind was not in the least changed, he went as a suppliant to
the statue of Dionysus. And the god heard the prayer of his priest, and
the Calydonians forthwith became insane as with drink, and died beside
themselves. They went therefore in their consternation to consult
the oracle at Dodona: for those who dwell on this mainland, as the
Ætolians and their neighbours the Acarnanians and Epirotes, believe in
the oracular responses they get from doves and the oak there. And they
were oracularly informed at Dodona that it was the wrath of Dionysus
that had caused this trouble, which would not end till Coresus either
sacrificed to Dionysus Callirhoe or somebody who should volunteer to
die instead of her. And as the maiden found no means of escape, she
fled to those who had brought her up, but obtaining no aid from them,
she had nothing now left but to die. But when all the preliminary
sacrificial rites that had been ordered at Dodona had taken place, and
she was led to the altar as victim, then Coresus took his place as
sacrificial priest, and yielding to love and not to anger slew himself
instead of her. And when she saw Coresus lying dead the poor girl
repented, and, moved by pity and shame at his fate, cut her own throat
at the well in Calydon not far from the harbour, which has ever since
been called Callirhoe after her.

And near the theatre is the sacred enclosure of some woman who was a
native of Patræ. And there are here some statues of Dionysus of the
same number and name as the ancient towns of the Achæans, for the god
is called Mesateus and Antheus and Aroeus. These statues during the
festival of Dionysus are carried to the temple of Æsymnetes, which
is near the sea on the right as you go from the market-place. And as
you go lower down from the temple of Æsymnetes there is a temple and
stone statue to Recovery, originally they say erected by Eurypylus when
he recovered from his madness. And near the harbour is a temple of
Poseidon, and his statue erect in white stone. Poseidon, besides the
names given to him by poets to deck out their poetry, has several local
names privately given to him, but his universal titles are Pelagæus
and Asphalius and Hippius. One might urge several reasons why he was
called Hippius, but I conjecture he got the name because he was the
inventor of riding. Homer at any rate in that part of his Iliad about
the horse-races has introduced Menelaus invoking this god in an oath.

“Touch the horses, and swear by the Earth-Shaker Poseidon that you did
not purposely with guile retard my chariot.”[11]

And Pamphus, the most ancient Hymn-writer among the Athenians, says
that Poseidon was “the giver of horses and ships with sails.” So he
got the name Hippius probably from riding and for no other reason.

Also at Patræ not very far from that of Poseidon are temples of
Aphrodite. One of the statues a generation before my time was fished up
by some fishermen in their net. There are also some statues very near
the harbour, as Ares in bronze, and Apollo, and Aphrodite. She has a
sacred enclosure near the harbour, and her statue is of wood except the
fingers and toes and head which are of stone. At Patræ there is also
a grove near the sea, which is a most convenient race-course, and a
most salubrious place of resort in summer time. In this grove there are
temples of Apollo and Aphrodite, their statues also in stone. There is
also a temple of Demeter, she and Proserpine are standing, but Earth
is seated. And in front of the temple of Demeter is a well, which has
a stone wall on the side near the temple, but there is a descent to it
outside. And there is here an unerring oracle, not indeed for every
matter, but in the case of diseases. They fasten a mirror to a light
cord and let it down into this well, poising it so as not to be covered
by the water, but that the rim of the mirror only should touch the
water. And then they look into the mirror after prayer to the goddess
and burning of incense. And it shews them whether the sick person will
die or recover. Such truth is there in this water. Similarly very near
Cyaneæ in Lycia is the oracle of Apollo Thyrxis, and the water there
shows anyone looking into the well whatever he wants to see. And near
the grove at Patræ are two temples of Serapis, and in one of them the
statue of the Egyptian Belus. The people of Patræ say that he fled to
Aroe from grief at the death of his sons, and that he shuddered at
the name of Argos, and was still more afraid of Danaus. There is also
a temple of Æsculapius at Patræ above the citadel and near the gates
which lead to Mesatis.

And the women at Patræ are twice as numerous as the men, and devoted to
Aphrodite if any women are. And most of them get their living by the
flax that grows in Elis, which they make into nets for the hair and
other parts of dress.

[11] Iliad, xxiii. 584, 5.




CHAPTER XXII.


And Pharæ, a town in Achaia, is reckoned with Patræ since the days of
Augustus, and the road to Pharæ from Patræ is about 150 stades, and
from the sea to the mainland about 70 stades. And the river Pierus
flows near Pharæ, the same river I think which flows by the ruins of
Olenus, and is called Pirus by the men who live near the sea. Near
the river is a grove of plane-trees, most of them hollow from old
age, and of such a size that whoever chooses can eat and sleep inside
them.[12] The circuit of the market-place is large at Pharæ according
to ancient custom, and in the middle of the market-place is a stone
statue of bearded Hermes; it is on the ground, no great size, and of
square shape. And the inscription on it says that it was an offering
of the Messenian Simylus. It is called Hermes of the Market-place,
and near it is an oracle. And before the statue is a hearth made of
stone, and some brazen lamps are fastened with lead to the hearth.
He that wants to consult the oracle of the god comes at eventide and
burns some frankincense on the hearth, and when he has filled the lamps
with oil and lit them, he lays on the altar on the right of the statue
the ordinary piece of money, a brass coin, and whispers his question
whatever it is in the ear of the statue of the god. Then he departs
from the market-place and stops up his ears. And when he has gone a
little distance off he takes his hands from his ears, and whatever he
next hears is he thinks the oracular response. The Egyptians have a
similar kind of oracle in the temple of Apis. And at Pharæ the water
is sacred, Hermes’ well is the name they give to it, and the fish in
it they do not catch, because they think them sacred to the god. And
very near the statue are 30 square stones, which the people of Pharæ
venerate highly, calling each by the name of one of the gods. And in
early times all the Greeks paid to unhewn stones, and not statues, the
honours due unto the gods. And about 15 stades from Pharæ is a grove of
Castor and Pollux. Bay trees chiefly grow in it, and there is neither
temple in it nor any statues. The people of the place say the statues
were removed to Rome. And in the grove at Pharæ is an altar of unhewn
stones. But I could not learn whether Phares, the son of Phylodamia,
the daughter of Danaus, or some one of the same name was the founder of
the town.

And Tritea, also a town of Achaia, is built in the interior of the
country, and reckoned with Patræ by Imperial order. The distance from
Pharæ to Tritea is about 120 stades. And before you get to it there
is a tomb in white stone, well worth seeing in other respects and not
least for the paintings on it, which are by Nicias. There is a throne
of ivory and a young and good-looking woman seated on it, and a maid
is standing by with a sun-shade. And a young man without a beard is
standing up clad in a tunic, with a scarlet cloak over the tunic. And
near him is a servant with some javelins, driving some hunting dogs.
I could not ascertain their names; but everybody infers that they are
husband and wife buried together. The founder of Tritea was some say
Celbidas, who came from Cumæ in the Opic land, others say that Ares had
an intrigue with Tritea the daughter of Triton, who was a priestess of
Athene, and Melanippus their son when he was grown up built the town,
and called it after the name of his mother. At Tritea there is a temple
to what are called the Greatest Gods, their statues are made of clay:
a festival is held to them annually, like the festival the Greeks hold
to Dionysus. There is also a temple of Athene, and a stone statue still
to be seen: the old statue was taken to Rome according to the tradition
of the people of Tritea. The people of the place are accustomed to
sacrifice both to Ares and Tritea.

These towns are at some distance from the sea and well inland: but as
you sail from Patræ to Ægium you come to the promontory of Rhium, about
50 stades from Patræ, and 15 stades further you come to the harbour of
Panormus. And about as many stades from Panormus is what is called the
wall of Athene, from which to the harbour of Erineus is 90 stades’ sail
along the coast, and 60 to Ægium from Erineus, but by land it is about
40 stades less. And not far from Patræ is the river Milichus, and the
temple of Triclaria (with no statue) on the right. And as you go on
from Milichus there is another river called Charadrus, and in summer
time the herds that drink of it mostly breed male cattle, for that
reason the herdsmen keep all cattle but cows away from it. These they
leave by the river, because both for sacrifices and work bulls are more
convenient than cows, but in all other kinds of cattle the female is
thought most valuable.

[12] See the wonderful account of Pliny. _Nat. Hist._ xii. 1.




CHAPTER XXIII.


And next to the river Charadrus are some ruins not very easy to trace
of the town of Argyra, and the well Argyra on the right of the high
road, and the river Selemnus that flows into the sea. The local account
is that Selemnus was a handsome youth who fed his flocks here, and they
say the sea-nymph Argyra was enamoured of him, and used to come up from
the sea and sleep with him. But in a short time Selemnus lost all his
good looks, and the Nymph no longer came to visit him, and Aphrodite
turned the poor lad Selemnus, who was deprived of Argyra and dying for
love, into a river. I tell the tale as the people of Patræ told it me.
And when he became a river he was still enamoured of Argyra, (as the
story goes about Alpheus that he still loved Arethusa,) but Aphrodite
at last granted him forgetfulness of Argyra. I have also heard another
tradition, _viz._ that the water of the Selemnus is a good love-cure
both for men and women, for if they bathe in this water they forget
their love. If there is any truth in this tradition, the water of
Selemnus would be more valuable to mankind than much wealth.

And at a little distance from Argyra is the river called Bolinæus, and
a town once stood there called Bolina. Apollo they say was enamoured
of a maiden called Bolina, and she fled from him and threw herself
into the sea, and became immortal through his favour. And there is
a promontory here jutting out into the sea, about which there is a
tradition that it was here that Cronos threw the sickle into the
sea, with which he had mutilated his father Uranus, so they call the
promontory Drepanum (_sickle_). And a little above the high road are
the ruins of Rhypæ, which is about 30 stades from Ægium. And the
district round Ægium is watered by the river Phœnix and another river
Miganitas, both of which flow into the sea. And a portico near the town
was built for the athlete Strato, (who conquered at Olympia on the
same day in the pancratium and in the wrestling), to practise in. And
at Ægium they have an ancient temple of Ilithyia, her statue is veiled
from her head to her toes with a finely-woven veil, and is of wood
except the face and fingers and toes, which are of Pentelican marble.
One of the hands is stretched out straight, and in the other she holds
a torch. One may symbolize Ilithyia’s torches thus, that the throes of
travail are to women as it were a fire. Or the torches may be supposed
to symbolize that Ilithyia brings children to the light. The statue is
by the Messenian Damophon.

And at no great distance from the temple of Ilithyia is the sacred
enclosure of Æsculapius, and statues in it of Hygiea and Æsculapius.
The iambic line on the basement says that they were by the Messenian
Damophon. In this temple of Æsculapius I had a controversy with a
Sidonian, who said that the Phœnicians had more accurate knowledge
generally about divine things than the Greeks, and their tradition was
that Apollo was the father of Æsculapius, but that he had no mortal
woman for his mother, and that Æsculapius was nothing but the air which
is beneficial for the health of mankind and all beasts, and that Apollo
was the Sun, and was most properly called the father of Æsculapius,
because the Sun in its course regulates the Seasons and gives health to
the air. All this I assented to, but was obliged to point out that this
view was as much Greek as Phœnician, since at Titane in Sicyonia the
statue of Æsculapius was called Health, and that it was plain even to
a child that the course of the sun on the earth produces health among
mankind.

At Ægium there is also a temple to Athene and another to Hera, and
Athene has two statues in white stone, but the statue of Hera may be
looked upon by none but women, and those only the priestesses. And
near the theatre is a temple and statue of beardless Dionysus. There
are also in the market-place sacred precincts of Zeus Soter, and two
statues on the left as you enter both of brass, the one without a beard
seemed to me the older of the two. And in a building right opposite
the road are brazen statues of Poseidon, Hercules, Zeus, and Athene,
and they call them the Argive gods, because the Argive tradition says
they were made at Argos, but the people of Ægium say it was because the
statues were deposited with them by the Argives. And they say further
that they were ordered to sacrifice to these statues every day: and
they found out a trick by which they could sacrifice as required, but
without any expense by feasting on the victims: and eventually these
statues were asked back by the Argives, and the people of Ægium asked
for the money they had spent on the sacrifices first, so the Argives
(as they could not pay this) left the statues with them.




CHAPTER XXIV.


At Ægium there is also near the market-place a temple in common to
Apollo and Artemis, and in the market-place is a temple to Artemis
alone dressed like a huntress, and the tomb of Talthybius the herald.
Talthybius has also a monument erected to him at Sparta, and both
cities perform funeral rites in his honour. And near the sea at Ægium
Aphrodite has a temple, and next Poseidon, and next Proserpine the
daughter of Demeter, and fourthly Zeus Homagyrius (_the Gatherer_).
There are statues too of Zeus and Aphrodite and Athene. And Zeus was
surnamed Homagyrius, because Agamemnon gathered together at this place
the most famous men in Greece, to deliberate together in common how to
attack the realm of Priam. Agamemnon has much renown generally, but
especially because with the army that accompanied him first, without
any reinforcements, he sacked Ilium and all the surrounding cities. And
next to Zeus Homagyrius is the temple of Pan-Achæan Demeter. And the
sea-shore at Ægium, where these temples just described are, furnishes
abundantly water good to drink from a well. There is also a temple to
Safety, the statue of the goddess may be seen by none but the priests,
but the rites are as follows. They take from the altar of the goddess
cakes made after the fashion of the country and throw them into the
sea, and say that they send them to Arethusa in Syracuse. The people at
Ægium have also several brazen statues as Zeus as a boy, and Hercules
without a beard, by Ageladas the Argive. Priests are chosen annually
for these gods, and each of the statues remains in the house of the
priest. And in older times the most beautiful boy was chosen as priest
to Zeus, and when their beards grew then the priest’s office passed
to some other beautiful boy. And Ægium is the place where the general
meeting of the Achæans is still held, just as the Amphictyonic Council
is held at Thermopylæ and Delphi.

As you go on you come to the river Selinus, and about 40 stades from
Ægium is a place called Helice near the sea. It was once an important
city, and the Ionians had there the most holy temple of Poseidon of
Helice. The worship of Poseidon of Helice still remained with them,
both when they were driven by the Achæans to Athens, and when they
afterwards went from Athens to the maritime parts of Asia Minor. And
the Milesians as you go to the well Biblis have an altar of Poseidon
of Helice before their city, and similarly at Teos the same god has
precincts and an altar. Even Homer has written of Helice, and of
Poseidon of Helice.[13] And later on the Achæans here, who drove some
suppliants from the temple and slew them, met with quick vengeance from
Poseidon, for an earthquake coming over the place rapidly overthrew
all the buildings, and made the very site of the city difficult for
posterity to find. Previously in earthquakes, remarkable for their
violence or extent, the god has generally given previous intimation
by signs. For either continuous rain or drought are mostly wont to
precede their approach: and in winter the air is hotter, and in summer
the disk of the sun is misty and has a different colour to its usual
colour, being either redder or slightly inclining to black. And the
springs are generally deficient in water, and gusts of wind sweeping
over the district uproot the trees, and in the sky are meteors with
flames of fire, and the appearance of the stars is unusual and excites
consternation in the beholders, and moreover vapours and exhalations
rise up out of the ground. And many other indications does the god
give in the case of violent earthquakes. And earthquakes are not
all similar, but those who have paid attention to such things from
the first or been instructed by others have been able to recognize
the following phenomena. The mildest of them, if indeed the word
mildness is applicable to any of them, is when simultaneously with the
first motion of the earth and with the rocking of buildings to their
foundation a counter motion restores them to their former position. And
in such an earthquake you may see pillars nearly rooted up falling into
their places again, and walls that gaped asunder joining again: and
beams that slipped out of their fittings slipping back again: so too in
the pipes of conduits, if any pipe bursts from the pressure of water,
the broken parts weld together again better than any workmen could
adjust them. Another kind of earthquake destroys everything within its
range, and, on whatever it spends its force, forthwith batters it down,
like the military engines employed in sieges. But the most deadly kind
of earthquake may be recognized by the following concomitants. The
breath of a man in a long-continued fever comes thicker and with much
effort, and this is marked in other parts of the body, but especially
by feeling the pulse. Similarly this kind of earthquake they say
undermines the foundations of buildings, and makes them rock to and
fro, like the effect produced by the burrowing of moles in the earth.
And this is the only kind of earthquake that leaves no trace in the
earth of previous habitation. This was the kind of earthquake that
rased Helice to the ground. And they say another misfortune happened
to the place in the winter at the same time. The sea encroached over
much of the district and quite flooded Helice with water: and the grove
of Poseidon was so submerged that the tops of the trees alone were
visible. And so the god suddenly sending the earthquake, and the sea
encroaching simultaneously, the inundation swept away Helice and its
population. A similar catastrophe happened to the town of Sipylus which
was swallowed up by a landslip. And when this landslip occurred in the
rock water came forth, and became a lake called Saloe, and the ruins
of Sipylus were visible in the lake, till the water pouring down hid
them from view. Visible too are the ruins of Helice, but not quite as
clearly as formerly, because they have been effaced by the action of
the sea.

[13] Hom. Iliad, ii. 575; viii. 203; xx. 404.




CHAPTER XXV.


One may learn not only from this ruin of Helice but also from other
cases that the vengeance of heaven for outrages upon suppliants
is sure. Thus the god at Dodona plainly exhorted men to respect
suppliants. For to the Athenians in the days of Aphidas came the
following message from Zeus at Dodona.

“Think of the Areopagus and the smoking altars of the Eumenides, for
you must treat as suppliants the Lacedæmonians conquered in battle.
Slay them not with the sword, harm not suppliants. Suppliants are
inviolable.”

This the Greeks remembered when the Peloponnesians came to Athens,
in the reign of Codrus the son of Melanthus. All the rest of the
Peloponnesian army retired from Attica, when they heard of the death
of Codrus and the circumstances attending it. For they did not any
longer expect victory, as Codrus had devoted himself in accordance with
the oracle at Delphi. But some of the Lacedæmonians got stealthily
into the city by night, and at daybreak perceived that their friends
had retired, and, as the Athenians began to muster against them, fled
for safety to the Areopagus and to the altars of the goddesses called
the August.[14] And the Athenians allowed the suppliants to depart
scot-free on this occasion, but some years later the authorities
destroyed the suppliants of Athene, those of Cylo’s party who had
occupied the Acropolis, and both the murderers and their children were
considered accursed by the goddess. Upon the Lacedæmonians too who had
killed some suppliants in the temple of Poseidon at Tænarum came an
earthquake so long-continued and violent, that no house in Lacedæmon
could stand against it. And the destruction of Helice happened when
Asteus was Archon at Athens, in the 4th year of the 101st Olympiad, in
which Damon of Thuria was victor. And as there were none left remaining
at Helice the people of Ægium occupied their territory.

And next to Helice, as you turn from the sea to the right, you will
come to the town of Cerynea, built on a hill above the high-road. It
got its name either from some local ruler or from the river Cerynites,
which rises in Arcadia in the Mountain Cerynea, and flows through
the district of those Achæans, who came from Argolis and dwelt there
through the following mischance. The fort of Mycenæ could not be
captured by the Argives owing to its strength, (for it had been built
by the Cyclopes as the wall at Tiryns also), but the people of Mycenæ
were obliged to evacuate their city because their supplies failed,
and some of them went to Cleonæ, but more than half took refuge with
Alexander in Macedonia, who had sent Mardonius the son of Gobryas
on a mission to the Athenians, and the rest went to Cerynea, and
Cerynea became more powerful through this influx of population, and
more notable in after times through this coming into the town of
the people of Mycenæ. And at Cerynea is a temple of the Eumenides,
built they say by Orestes. Whatever wretch, stained with blood or
any other defilement, comes into this temple to look round, he is
forthwith driven frantic by his fears. And for this reason people are
not admitted into this temple indiscriminately. The statues of the
goddesses in the temple are of wood and not very large: but the statues
of some women in the vestibule are of stone and artistically carved:
the natives say that they are some priestesses of the Eumenides.

And as you return from Cerynea to the high road, and proceed along it
no great distance, the second turn to the right from the sea takes
you by a winding road to Bura, which lies on a hill. The town got its
name they say from Bura the daughter of Ion, the Son of Xuthus by
Helice. And when Helice was totally destroyed by the god, Bura also
was afflicted by a mighty earthquake, so that none of the old statues
were left in the temples. And those that happened to be at that time
away on military service or some other errand were the only people of
Bura preserved. There are temples here to Demeter, and Aphrodite, and
Dionysus, and Ilithyia. Their statues are of Pentelican marble by the
Athenian Euclides. Demeter is robed. There is also a temple to Isis.

And as you descend from Bura to the sea is the river called Buraicus,
and a not very big Hercules in a cave, surnamed Buraicus, whose
oracular responses are ascertained by dice on a board. He that consults
the god prays before his statue, and after prayer takes dice, plenty
of which are near Hercules, and throws four on the board. And on every
dice is a certain figure inscribed, which has its interpretation in
a corresponding figure on the board. It is about 30 stades from this
temple of Hercules to Helice by the direct road. And as you go on your
way from the temple of Hercules you come to a perennial river, that has
its outlet into the sea, and rises in an Arcadian mountain, its name
is Crathis as also the name of the mountain, and from this Crathis the
river near Croton in Italy got its name. And near the Crathis in Achaia
was formerly the town Ægæ, which they say was eventually deserted from
its weakness. Homer has mentioned this Ægæ in a speech of Hera,

 “They bring you gifts to Helice and Ægæ,”[15]

plainly therefore Poseidon had gifts equally at Helice and Ægæ. And
at no great distance from Crathis is a tomb on the right of the road,
and on it you will find a rather indistinct painting of a man standing
by a horse. And the road from this tomb to what is called Gaius is
30 stades: Gaius is a temple of Earth called the Broad-breasted. The
statue is very ancient. And the woman who becomes priestess remains
henceforth in a state of chastity, and before she must only have been
married once. And they are tested by drinking bull’s blood, whoever of
them is not telling the truth is detected at once and punished. And
if there are several competitors, the woman who obtains most lots is
appointed priestess.

[14] A euphemism for the Eumenides.

[15] Iliad, viii. 203.




CHAPTER XXVI.


And the seaport at Ægira (both town and seaport have the same name) is
72 stades from the temple of Hercules Buraicus. Near the sea there is
nothing notable at Ægira, from the port to the upper part of the town
is 12 stades. In Homer[16] the town is called Hyperesia, the present
name was given to it by the Ionian settlers for the following reason.
A hostile band of Sicyonians was going to invade their land. And they,
not thinking themselves a match for the Sicyonians, collected together
all the goats in the country, and fastened torches to their horns,
and directly night came on lit these torches. And the Sicyonians, who
thought that the allies of the Hyperesians were coming up, and that
this light was the campfires of the allied force, went home again: and
the Hyperesians changed the name of their city because of these goats,
and at the place where the goat that was most handsome and the leader
of the rest had crouched down there they built a temple to Artemis the
Huntress, thinking that this stratagem against the Sicyonians would
not have occurred to them but for Artemis. Not that the name Ægira
prevailed at once over Hyperesia. Even in my time there are still some
who call Oreus in Eubœa by its old name of Hestiæa. At Ægira there
is a handsome temple of Zeus, and his statue in a sitting posture in
Pentelican marble by the Athenian Euclides. The head and fingers and
toes are of ivory, and the rest is wood gilt and richly variegated.
There is also a temple of Artemis, and a statue of the goddess which is
of modern art. A maiden is priestess, till she grows to a marriageable
age. And the old statue that stands there is, according to the
tradition of the people at Ægira, Iphigenia the daughter of Agamemnon:
and if they state what is correct, the temple must originally have been
built to Iphigenia. There is also a very ancient temple of Apollo,
ancient is the temple, ancient are the gables, ancient is the statue
of the god, which is naked and of great size. Who made it none of the
natives could tell: but whoever has seen the Hercules at Sicyon, would
conjecture that the Apollo at Ægira was by the same hand as that,
namely by Laphaes of Phlius. And there are some statues of Æsculapius
in the temple in a standing position, and of Serapis and Isis apart in
Pentelican marble. And they worship most of all Celestial Aphrodite:
but men must not enter her temple. But into the temple of the Syrian
goddess they may enter on stated days, but only after the accustomed
rites and fasting. I have also seen another building in Ægira, in which
there is a statue of Fortune with the horn of Amalthea, and next it
a Cupid with wings: to symbolize to men that success in love is due
to chance rather than beauty. I am much of the opinion of Pindar in
his Ode that Fortune is one of the Fates, and more powerful than her
sisters. And in this building at Ægira is a statue of a man rather old
and evidently in grief, and 3 women are taking off their bracelets,
and there are 3 young men standing by, and one has a breastplate on.
The tradition about him is that he died after fighting most bravely of
all the people of Ægira against the Achæans, and his brothers brought
home the news of his death, and his sisters are stripping off their
bracelets out of grief at his loss, and the people of the place call
the old man his father Sympathetic, because he is clearly grieving in
the statue.

And there is a direct road from Ægira starting from the temple of Zeus
over the mountains. It is a hilly road, and about 40 stades bring you
to Phelloe, not a very important place, nor inhabited at all when
the Ionians still occupied the land. The neighbourhood of Phelloe is
very good for vine-growing, and in the rocky parts are trees and wild
animals, as wild deer and wild boars. And if any places in Greece are
well situated in respect of abundance of water, Phelloe is one of them.
And there are temples to Dionysus and Artemis, the goddess is in bronze
in the act of taking a dart out of her quiver, and Dionysus’ statue is
decorated with vermilion. As you go down towards the seaport from Ægira
and forward a little there is, on the right of the road, a temple of
Artemis the Huntress, where they say the goat crouched down.

And next to Ægira is Pellene: the people of Pellene are the last of
the Achæans near Sicyon and Argolis. Their town was called according to
their own tradition from Pallas who they say was one of the Titans, but
according to the tradition of the Argives from the Argive Pellen, who
was they say the son of Phorbas and grandson of Triopas. And between
Ægira and Pellene there is a town subject to Sicyon called Donussa,
which was destroyed by the Sicyonians, and which they say is mentioned
by Homer in his Catalogue of Agamemnon’s forces in the line,

    “And those who inhabited Hyperesia and steep Donoessa.”
                                              Il. ii. 573.

But when Pisistratus collected the verses of Homer, that had been
scattered about and had to be got together from various quarters,
either he or some of his companions in the task changed the name
inadvertently.[17] The people of Pellene call their seaport
Aristonautæ. To it from Ægira on the sea is a distance of 120 stades,
and it is half this distance to Pellene from the seaport. The name
Aristonautæ was given they say to their seaport because the Argonauts
put in at the harbour.

[16] Iliad, ii. 573.

[17] To _Gonoessa_, the reading to be found in modern texts of Homer.




CHAPTER XXVII.


And the town of Pellene is on a hill which is very steep in its topmost
peak, (indeed precipitous and therefore uninhabited), and is built
upon its more level parts not continuously, but is cut as it were into
two parts by the peak which lies between. And as you approach Pellene
you see a statue of Hermes on the road called Dolios (_wily_), he is
very ready to accomplish the prayers of people: it is a square statue,
the god is bearded and has a hat on his head. On the way to the town
there is also a temple of Athene made of the stone of the country, her
statue is of ivory and gold by they say Phidias, who earlier still made
statues of Athene at Athens and Platæa. And the people of Pellene say
that there is a shrine of Athene deep underground under the base of
her statue, and that the air from it is damp and therefore good for
the ivory. And above the temple of Athene is a grove with a wall built
round it to Artemis called the Saviour, their greatest oath is by her.
No one may enter this grove but the priests, who are chiefly chosen out
of the best local families. And opposite this grove is the temple of
Dionysus called the Lighter, for when they celebrate his festival they
carry torches into his temple by night, and place bowls of wine all
over the city. At Pellene there is also a temple of Apollo Theoxenius,
the statue is of bronze, and they hold games to Apollo called
Theoxenia, and give silver as a prize for victory, and the men of the
district contend. And near the temple of Apollo is one of Artemis,
she is dressed as an archer. And there is a conduit built in the
market-place, their baths have to be of rain-water for there are not
many wells with water to drink below the city, except at a place called
Glyceæ. And there is an old gymnasium chiefly given up to the youths to
practise in, nor can any be enrolled as citizens till they have arrived
at man’s estate. Here is the statue of Promachus of Pellene, the son of
Dryon, who won victories in the pancratium, one at Olympia, three at
the Isthmus, and two at Nemea, and the people of Pellene erected two
statues to him, one at Olympia, and one in the gymnasium, the latter in
stone and not in brass. And it is said that in the war between Corinth
and Pellene Promachus slew most of the enemy opposed to him. It is
said also that he beat at Olympia Polydamas of Scotussa, who contended
a second time at Olympia, after coming home safe from the King of the
Persians. But the Thessalians do not admit that Polydamas was beaten,
and they bring forward to maintain their view the line about Polydamas,

    “O Scotoessa, nurse of the invincible Polydamas.”

However the people of Pellene hold Promachus in the highest honour. But
Chæron, though he won two victories in wrestling, and 4 at Olympia,
they do not even care to mention, I think because he destroyed the
constitution of Pellene, receiving a very large bribe from Alexander
the son of Philip to become the tyrant of his country. At Pellene
there is also a temple of Ilithyia, built in the smaller half of the
town. What is called Poseidon’s chapel was originally a parish room,
but is not used in our day, but it still continues to be held sacred to
Poseidon, and is under the gymnasium.

And about 60 stades from Pellene is Mysæum, the temple of Mysian
Demeter. It was built they say by Mysius an Argive, who also received
Demeter into his house according to the tradition of the Argives. There
is a grove at Mysæum of all kinds of trees, and plenty of water springs
up from some fountains. And they keep the feast here to Demeter 7 days,
and on the third day of the feast the men withdraw from the temple, and
the women perform there alone during the night their wonted rites, and
not only are the men banished but even male dogs. And on the following
day, when the men return to the temple, the women and men mutually jest
and banter one another. And at no great distance from Mysæum is the
temple of Æsculapius called Cyros, where men are healed by the god.
Water too flows freely there, and by the largest of the fountains is
a statue of Æsculapius. And some rivers have their rise in the hills
above Pellene: one of them, called Crius from the Titan Crius, flows
in the direction of Ægira.... There is another river Crius which rises
at the mountain Sipylus and is a tributary of the Hermus. And on the
borders between Pellene and Sicyonia is the river Sythas, the last
river in Achaia, which has its outlet in the Sicyonian sea.




BOOK VIII.--ARCADIA.




CHAPTER I.


The parts of Arcadia near Argolis are inhabited by the people of Tegea
and Mantinea. They and the other Arcadians are the inland division of
the Peloponnese. For the Corinthians come first at the Isthmus: and
next them by the sea are the Epidaurians: and by Epidaurus and Trœzen
and Hermion is the Gulf of Argolis, and the maritime parts of Argolis:
and next are the states of the Lacedæmonians, and next comes Messenia,
which touches the sea at Mothone and Pylos and near Cyparissiæ. At
Lechæum the Sicyonians border upon the Corinthians, being next to
Argolis on that side: and next to Sicyon are the Achæans on the
sea-shore, and the other part of the Peloponnese opposite the Echinades
is occupied by Elis. And the borders between Elis and Messenia are by
Olympia and the mouth of the Alpheus, and between Elis and Achaia the
neighbourhood of Dyme. These states that I have mentioned border on the
sea, but the Arcadians live in the interior and are shut off from the
sea entirely: from which circumstance Homer describes them as having
come to Troy not in their own ships but in transports provided by
Agamemnon.[18]

The Arcadians say that Pelasgus was the first settler in their land.
It is probable that others also came with Pelasgus and that he did not
come alone. For in that case what subjects would he have had? I think
moreover that Pelasgus was eminent for strength and beauty and judgment
beyond others, and that was why he was appointed king over them. This
is the description of him by Asius.

    “Divine Pelasgus on the tree-clad hills
    Black Earth brought forth, to be of mortal race.”

And Pelasgus when he became king contrived huts that men should be free
from cold and rain, and not be exposed to the fierce sun, and also
garments made of the hides of pigs, such as the poor now use in Eubœa
and Phocis. He was the inventor of these comforts. He too taught people
to abstain from green leaves and grass and roots that were not good to
eat, some even deadly to those who eat them. He discovered also that
the fruit of some trees was good, especially acorns. And several since
Pelasgus’ time have adopted this diet, so much so that the Pythian
Priestess, when she forbade the Lacedæmonians to touch Arcadia, did
so in the following words, “Many acorn-eating warriors are there in
Arcadia, who will keep you off. I tell you the truth, I bear you no
grudge.”

And it was they say during the reign of Pelasgus that Arcadia was
called Pelasgia.

[18] Iliad, ii. 612.




CHAPTER II.


And Lycaon the son of Pelasgus devised even wiser things than his
father. For he founded the town Lycosura on the Mountain Lycæus, and
called Zeus Lycæus, and established a festival to him called the
Lycæa. I do not think the Pan-Athenæa was established by the Athenians
earlier, for their games were called Athenæa till the time of Theseus,
when they were called Pan-Athenæa, because when they were then
celebrated all the Athenians were gathered together into one city. As
to the Olympian games--which they trace back to a period earlier than
man, and in which they represent Cronos and Zeus wrestling, and the
Curetes as the first competitors in running--for these reasons they may
be passed over in the present account. And I think that Cecrops, king
of Athens, and Lycaon were contemporaries, but did not display equal
wisdom to the deity. For Cecrops was the first to call Zeus supreme,
and did not think it right to sacrifice anything that had life, but
offered on the altar the national cakes, which the Athenians still call
by a special name, (_pelani_). But Lycaon brought a baby to the altar
of Lycæan Zeus, and sacrificed it upon it, and sprinkled its blood on
the altar. And they say directly after this sacrifice he became a wolf
instead of a man. This tale I can easily credit, as it is a very old
tradition among the Arcadians, and probable enough in itself. For the
men who lived in those days were guests at the tables of the gods in
consequence of their righteousness and piety, and those who were good
clearly met with honour from the gods, and similarly those who were
wicked with wrath, for the gods in those days were sometimes mortals
who are still worshipped, as Aristæus, and Britomartis of Crete, and
Hercules the son of Alcmena, and Amphiaraus the son of Œcles, and
besides them Castor and Pollux. So one might well believe that Lycaon
became a wolf, and Niobe the daughter of Tantalus a stone. But in our
day, now wickedness has grown and spread all over the earth in all
towns and countries, no mortal any longer becomes a god except in the
language of excessive flattery,[19] and the wicked receive wrath from
the gods very late and only after their departure from this life. And
in every age many curious things have happened, and some of them have
been made to appear incredible to many, though they really happened,
by those who have grafted falsehood on to truth. For they say that
after Lycaon a person became a wolf from a man at the Festival of
Lycæan Zeus, but not for all his life: for whenever he was a wolf if
he abstained from meat ten months he became a man again, but if he
tasted meat he remained a beast. Similarly they say that Niobe on Mount
Sipylus weeps in summer time. And I have heard of other wonderful
things, as people marked like vultures and leopards, and of the Tritons
speaking with a human voice, who sing some say through a perforated
shell. Now all that listen with pleasure to such fables are themselves
by nature apt to exaggerate the wonderful, and so mixing fiction with
truth they get discredited.

[19] _e.g._, as used to the Roman Emperors, _divus_.




CHAPTER III.


The third generation after Pelasgus Arcadia advanced in population and
cities. Nyctimus was the eldest son of Lycaon and succeeded to all
his power, and his brothers built cities where each fancied. Pallas
and Orestheus and Phigalus built Pallantium, and Orestheus built
Oresthasium, and Phigalus built Phigalia. Stesichorus of Himera has
mentioned a Pallantium in Geryoneis, and Phigalia and Oresthasium in
process of time changed their names, the latter got called Oresteum
from Orestes the son of Agamemnon, and the former Phialia from
Phialus the son of Bucolion. And Trapezeus and Daseatas and Macareus
and Helisson and Thocnus built Thocnia, and Acacus built Acacesium.
From this Acacus, according to the tradition of the Arcadians, Homer
invented a surname for Hermes. And from Helisson the city and river
Helisson got their names. Similarly also Macaria and Dasea and Trapezus
got their names from sons of Lycaon. And Orchomenus was founder of
Methydrium and Orchomenus, which is called rich in cattle by Homer
in his Iliad.[20] And Hypsus built Melæneæ and Hypsus and Thyræum
and Hæmoniæ: and according to the Arcadians Thyrea in Argolis and
the Thyreatic Gulf got their name from Thyreates. And Mænalus built
Mænalus, in ancient times the most famous town in Arcadia, and Tegeates
built Tegea, and Mantineus built Mantinea. And Cromi got its name from
Cromus, and Charisia from Charisius its founder, and Tricoloni from
Tricolonus, and Peræthes from Peræthus, and Asea from Aseatas, and
Lycoa from Lyceus, and Sumatia from Sumateus. And both Alipherus and
Heræus gave their names to towns. And Œnotrus, the youngest of the sons
of Lycaon, having got money and men from his brother Nyctimus, sailed
to Italy, and became king of the country called after him Œnotria. This
was the first colony that started from Greece, for if one accurately
investigates one will find that no foreign voyages for the purpose of
colonization were ever made before Œnotrus.

With so many sons Lycaon had only one daughter Callisto. According to
the tradition of the Greeks Zeus had an intrigue with her. And when
Hera detected it she turned Callisto into a she-bear, whom Artemis shot
to please Hera. And Zeus sent Hermes with orders to save the child that
Callisto was pregnant with. And her he turned into the Constellation
known as the Great Bear, which Homer mentions in the voyage of Odysseus
from Calypso,

 “Looking on the Pleiades and late-setting Bootes, and the Bear, which
 they also call Charles’ wain.”[21]

But perhaps the Constellation merely got its name out of honour to
Callisto, for the Arcadians shew her grave.

[20] Iliad, ii. 605.

[21] Odyssey, v. 272, 273.




CHAPTER IV.


And after the death of Nyctimus Arcas the son of Callisto succeeded
him in the kingdom. And he introduced sowing corn being taught by
Triptolemus, and showed his people how to make bread, and to weave
garments and other things, having learnt spinning from Adristas. And in
his reign the country was called Arcadia instead of Pelasgia, and the
inhabitants were called Arcadians instead of Pelasgi. And they say he
mated with no mortal woman but with a Dryad Nymph. For the Nymphs used
to be called Dryades, and Epimeliades, and sometimes Naiades, Homer in
his poems mainly mentions them as Naiades.[22] The name of this Nymph
was Erato, and they say Arcas had by her Azan and Aphidas and Elatus:
he had had a bastard son Autolaus still earlier. And when they grew up
Arcas divided the country among his 3 legitimate sons, Azania took its
name from Azan, and they are said to be colonists from Azania who dwell
near the cave in Phrygia called Steunos and by the river Pencala. And
Aphidas got Tegea and the neighbouring country, and so the poets call
Tegea the lot of Aphidas. And Elatus had Mount Cyllene, which had no
name then, and afterwards he migrated into what is now called Phocis,
and aided the Phocians who were pressed hard in war by the Phlegyes,
and built the city Elatea. And Azan had a son Clitor, and Aphidas had
a son called Aleus, and Elatus had five sons, Æpytus and Pereus and
Cyllen and Ischys and Stymphelus. And when Azan died funeral games
were first established, I don’t know whether any other but certainly
horseraces. And Clitor the son of Azan lived at Lycosora, and was
the most powerful of the kings, and built the city which he called
Clitor after his own name. And Aleus inherited his father’s share. And
Mount Cyllene got its name from Cyllen, and from Stymphelus the well
and city by the well were both called Stymphelus. The circumstances
attending the death of Ischys, the son of Elatus, I have already given
in my account of Argolis. And Pereus had no male offspring but only a
daughter Neæra, who married Autolycus, who dwelt on Mount Parnassus,
and was reputed to be the son of Hermes, but was really the son of
Dædalion.

And Clitor the son of Azan had no children, so the kingdom of Arcadia
devolved upon Æpytus the son of Elatus. And as he was out hunting he
was killed not by any wild animal but by a serpent, little expecting
such an end. I have myself seen the particular kind of serpent. It is a
very small ash-coloured worm, marked with irregular stripes, its head
is broad and its neck narrow, it has a large belly and small tail, and,
like the serpent they call the horned serpent, walks sideways like the
crab. And Æpytus was succeeded in the kingdom by Aleus, for Agamedes
and Gortys, the sons of Stymphelus, were great-grandsons of Arcas,
but Aleus was his grandson, being the son of Aphidas. And Aleus built
the old temple to Athene Alea at Tegea, which he made the seat of his
kingdom. And Gortys, the son of Stymphelus, built the town Gortys by
the river called Gortynius. And Aleus had three sons, Lycurgus and
Amphidamas and Cepheus, and one daughter Auge. According to Hecatæus
Hercules, when he came to Tegea, had an intrigue with this Auge, and
at last she was discovered to be with child by him, and Aleus put her
and the child in a chest and let it drift to sea. And she got safely
to Teuthras, a man of substance in the plain of Caicus, and he fell in
love with her and married her. And her tomb is at Pergamus beyond the
Caicus, a mound of earth with a stone wall round it, and on the tomb a
device in bronze, a naked woman. And after the death of Aleus Lycurgus
his son succeeded to the kingdom by virtue of being the eldest. He
did nothing very notable except that he slew by guile and not fairly
Areithous a warrior. And of his sons Epochus died of some illness,
but Ancæus sailed to Colchi with Jason, and afterwards, hunting with
Meleager the wild boar in Calydon, was killed by it. Lycurgus lived to
an advanced old age, having survived both his sons.

[22] _e.g._ Odyssey, xiii. 104.




CHAPTER V.


And after the death of Lycurgus Echemus, the son of Aeropus the son of
Cepheus the son of Aleus, became king of the Arcadians. In his reign
the Dorians, who were returning to the Peloponnese under the leadership
of Hyllus the son of Hercules, were beaten in battle by the Achæans
near the Isthmus of Corinth, and Echemus slew Hyllus in single combat
being challenged by him. For this seems more probable to me now than
my former account, in which I wrote that Orestes was at this time king
of the Achæans, and that it was during his reign that Hyllus ventured
his descent upon the Peloponnese. And according to the later tradition
it would seem that Timandra, the daughter of Tyndareus, married
Echemus after he had killed Hyllus. And Agapenor, the son of Ancæus
and grandson of Lycurgus, succeeded Echemus and led the Arcadians to
Troy. And after the capture of Ilium the storm which fell on the Greeks
as they were sailing home carried Agapenor and the Arcadian fleet to
Cyprus, and he became the founder of Paphos, and erected the temple of
Aphrodite in that town, the goddess having been previously honoured by
the people of Cyprus in the place called Golgi. And afterwards Laodice,
the daughter of Agapenor, sent to Tegea a robe for Athene Alea, and the
inscription on it gives the nationality of Laodice.

“This is the robe which Laodice gave to her own Athene, sending it
from sacred Cyprus to her spacious fatherland.”

And as Agapenor did not get home from Ilium, the kingdom devolved
upon Hippothous, the son of Cercyon, the son of Agamedes, the son of
Stymphelus. Of him they record nothing notable, but that he transferred
the seat of the kingdom from Tegea to Trapezus. And Æpytus the son of
Hippothous succeeded his father, and Orestes the son of Agamemnon,
in obedience to the oracle of Apollo at Delphi, migrated to Arcadia
from Mycenæ. And Æpytus the son of Hippothous presuming to go into the
temple of Poseidon at Mantinea, (though men were not allowed to enter
it either then or now,) was struck blind on his entrance, and died not
long afterwards.

And during the reign of Cypselus, his son and successor, the Dorians
returned to the Peloponnese in ships, landing near the Promontory of
Rhium, not as three generations earlier attempting to return by way
of the Isthmus of Corinth, and Cypselus, hearing of their return,
gave his daughter in marriage to Cresphontes, the only unmarried son
of Aristomachus, and thus won him over to his interests, and he and
the Arcadians had now nothing to fear. And the son and successor of
Cypselus was Olæas, who, in junction with the Heraclidæ from Lacedæmon
and Argos, restored his sister’s son Æpytus to Messene. The next king
was Bucolion, the next Phialus, who deprived Phigalus, (the founder
of Phigalia, and the son of Lycaon), of the honour of giving his name
to that town, by changing its name to Phialia after his own name,
though the new name did not universally prevail. And during the reign
of Simus, the son of Phialus, the old statue of Black Demeter that
belonged to the people of Phigalia was destroyed by fire. This was a
portent that not long afterwards Simus himself would end his life.
And during the reign of Pompus his successor the Æginetans sailed to
Cyllene for purposes of commerce. There they put their goods on beasts
of burden and took them into the interior of Arcadia. For this good
service Pompus highly honoured the Æginetans, and out of friendship
to them gave the name of Æginetes to his son and successor: who was
succeeded by his son Polymestor during whose reign Charillus and
the Lacedæmonians first invaded the district round Tegea, and were
beaten in battle by the men of Tegea, and also by the women who
put on armour, and Charillus and his army were taken prisoners. We
shall give a further account of them when we come to Tegea. And as
Polymestor had no children Æchmis succeeded, the son of Briacas, and
nephew of Polymestor. Briacas was the son of Æginetes but younger
than Polymestor. And it was during the reign of Æchmis that the war
broke out between the Lacedæmonians and Messenians. The Arcadians had
always had a kindly feeling towards the Messenians, and now they openly
fought against the Lacedæmonians in conjunction with Aristodemus king
of Messenia. And Aristocrates, the son of Æchmis, acted insolently to
his fellow-countrymen in various ways, but his great impiety to the
gods I cannot pass over. There is a temple of Artemis Hymnia on the
borders between Orchomenus and Mantinea. She was worshipped of old by
all the Arcadians. And her priestess at this time was a maiden. And
Aristocrates, as she resisted all his attempts to seduce her, and fled
at last for refuge to the altar near the statue of Artemis, defiled
her there. And when his wickedness was reported to the Arcadians they
stoned him to death, and their custom was thenceforward changed.
For instead of a maiden as priestess of Artemis they had a woman
who was tired of the company of men. His son was Hicetas, who had a
son Aristocrates, of the same name as his grandfather, and who met
with the same fate, for he too was stoned to death by the Arcadians,
who detected him receiving bribes from Lacedæmon, and betraying the
Messenians at the great reverse they met with at the Great Trench. This
crime was the reason why all the descendants of Cypselus were deposed
from the sovereignty of Arcadia.




CHAPTER VI.


In all these particulars about their kings, as I was curious, the
Arcadians gave me full information. And as to the nation generally,
their most ancient historical event is the war against Ilium, and
next their fighting against the Lacedæmonians in conjunction with the
Messenians; they also took part in the action against the Medes at
Platæa. And rather from compulsion than choice they fought under the
Lacedæmonians against the Athenians, and crossed into Asia Minor with
Agesilaus, and were present at the battle of Leuctra in Bœotia. But on
other occasions they exhibited their suspicion of the Lacedæmonians,
and after the reverse of the Lacedæmonians at Leuctra they at once left
them and joined the Thebans. They did not join the Greeks in fighting
against Philip and the Macedonians at Chæronea, or in Thessaly against
Antipater, nor did they fight against them, but they remained neutral.
And they did not (they say) share in fighting against the Galati at
Thermopylæ, only because they were afraid that, in the absence from
home of the flower of their young men, the Lacedæmonians would ravage
their land. And the Arcadians were of all the Greeks the most zealous
members of the Achæan League. And all that happened to them that I
could ascertain, not publicly but privately in their several cities, I
shall describe as I come to each part of the subject.

The passes into Arcadia from Argolis are by Hysiæ and across the
mountain Parthenium into the district of Tegea, and two by Mantinea
through what are called _Holm-Oak_ and _Ladder_. _Ladder_ is the
broadest, and has steps cut in it. And when you have crossed that pass
you come to Melangea, which supplies the people of Mantinea with water
to drink. And as you advance from Melangea, about seven stades further,
you come to a well called the well of the Meliastæ. These Meliastæ
have orgies to Dionysus, and they have a hall of Dionysus near the
well, and a temple to Aphrodite Melænis (_Black_). There seems no other
reason for this title of the goddess, than that men generally devote
themselves to love in the darkness of night, not like the animals in
broad daylight. The other pass over Artemisium is far narrower than
_Ladder-pass_. I mentioned before that Artemisium has a temple and
statue of Artemis, and that in it are the sources of the river Inachus,
which as long as it flows along the mountain road is the boundary
between the Argives and Mantineans, but when it leaves this road flows
thenceforward through Argolis, and hence Æschylus and others call it
the Argive river.




CHAPTER VII.


As you cross over Artemisium into the district of Mantinea the plain
Argum (_unfruitful_) will receive you, rightly so called. For the rain
that comes down from the mountains makes the plain unfruitful, and
would have prevented it being anything but a swamp, had not the water
disappeared in a cavity in the ground. It reappears at a place called
Dine. This Dine is at a place in Argolis called Genethlium, and the
water is sweet though it comes up from the sea. At Dine the Argives
used formerly to offer to Poseidon horses ready bridled. Sweet water
comes up from the sea plainly here in Argolis, and also in Thesprotia
at a place called Chimerium. More wonderful still is the hot water of
Mæander, partly flowing from a rock which the river surrounds, partly
coming up from the mud of the river. And near Dicæarchia (_Puteoli_) in
Tyrrhenia the sea water is hot, and an island has been constructed, so
as for the water to afford warm baths.

There is a mountain on the left of the plain Argum, where there are
ruins of the camp of Philip, the son of Amyntas, and of the village
Nestane. For it was at this village they say that Philip encamped, and
the well there they still call Philip’s well. He went into Arcadia to
win over the Arcadians to his side, and at the same time to separate
them from the other Greeks. Philip one can well believe displayed the
greatest valour of all the Macedonian kings before or after him, but
no rightminded person could call him a good man, seeing that he trod
under foot the oaths he had made to the gods, and on all occasions
violated truces, and dishonoured good faith among men. And the
vengeance of the deity came upon him not late, but early. For Philip
had only lived 46 years when the oracle at Delphi was made good by his
death, given to him they say when he inquired about the Persian war,

 “The bull is crowned, the end is come, the sacrificer’s near.”

This as the god very soon showed did not refer to the Mede, but to
Philip himself. And after the death of Philip his baby boy by Cleopatra
the niece of Attalus was put by Olympias with his mother into a brazen
vessel over a fire, and so killed. Olympias also subsequently killed
Aridæus. The deity also intended as it seems to mow down all the family
of Cassander by untimely ends. For Cassander married Thessalonica
the daughter of Philip, and Thessalonica and Aridæus had Thessalian
mothers. As to Alexander all know of his early death. But if Philip
had considered the eulogium passed upon Glaucus the Spartan, and had
remembered that line in each of his actions,

 “The posterity of a conscientious man shall be fortunate,”[23]

I do not think that there would have been any reason for any of the
gods to have ended at the same time the life of Alexander and the
Macedonian supremacy. But this has been a digression.

[23] See Herod. vi. 86. Hesiod, 285.




CHAPTER VIII.


And next to the ruins of Nestane is a temple sacred to Demeter, to whom
the Mantineans hold a festival annually. And under Nestane is much of
the plain Argum, and the place called Mæras, which is 10 stades from
the plain. And when you have gone on no great distance you will come
to another plain, in which near the high road is a fountain called
Arne. The following is the tradition of the Arcadians about it. When
Rhea gave birth to Poseidon, the little boy was deposited with the
flocks and fed with the lambs, and so the fountain was called Arne,
(_lamb fountain_). And Rhea told Cronos that she had given birth to
a foal, and gave him a foal to eat up instead of the little boy,
just as afterwards instead of Zeus she gave him a stone wrapt up in
swaddling-clothes. As to these fables of the Greeks I considered them
childish when I began this work, but when I got as far as this book I
formed this view, that those who were reckoned wise among the Greeks
spoke of old in riddles and not directly, so I imagine the fables about
Cronos to be Greek wisdom. Of the traditions therefore about the gods I
shall state such as I meet with.

Mantinea is about 12 stades from this fountain. Mantineus, the son
of Lycaon, seems to have built the town of Mantinea, (which name the
Arcadians still use), on another site, from which it was transferred to
its present site by Antinoe, the daughter of Cepheus the son of Aleus,
who according to an oracle made a serpent (what kind of serpent they
do not record) her guide. And that is why the river which flows by the
town got its name Ophis (_serpent_). And if we may form a judgment
from the Iliad of Homer this serpent was probably a dragon. For when
in the Catalogue of the Ships Homer describes the Greeks leaving
Philoctetes behind in Lemnos suffering from his ulcer,[24] he did not
give the title serpent to the watersnake, but he did give that title to
the dragon whom the eagle dropped among the Trojans.[25] So it seems
probable that Antinoe was led by a dragon.

The Mantineans did not fight against the Lacedæmonians at Dipæa with
the other Arcadians, but in the Peloponnesian war they joined the
people of Elis against the Lacedæmonians, and fought against them,
with some reinforcements from the Athenians, and also took part in
the expedition to Sicily out of friendship to the Athenians. And
some time afterwards a Lacedæmonian force under King Agesipolis, the
son of Pausanias, invaded the territory of Mantinea. And Agesipolis
was victorious in the battle, and shut the Mantineans up in their
fortress, and captured Mantinea in no long time, not by storm, but
by turning the river Ophis into the city through the walls which were
built of unbaked brick. As to battering rams brick walls hold out
better even than those made of stone, for the stones get broken and
come out of position, so that brick walls suffer less, but unbaked
brick is melted by water just as wax by the sun. This stratagem which
Agesipolis employed against the walls of Mantinea was formerly employed
by Cimon, the son of Miltiades, when he was besieging Boges the Mede
and the Persians at Eion on the Strymon. So Agesipolis merely imitated
what he had heard sung of by the Greeks. And when he took Mantinea,
he left part of it habitable, but most of it he rased to the ground,
and distributed the inhabitants in the various villages. The Thebans
after the battle of Leuctra intended to restore the Mantineans from
these villages to Mantinea. But though thus restored they were not
at all faithful to the Thebans. For when they were besieged by the
Lacedæmonians they made private overtures to them for peace, without
acting in concert with the other Arcadians, and from fear of the
Thebans openly entered into an offensive and defensive alliance with
the Lacedæmonians, and in the battle fought on Mantinean territory
between the Thebans under Epaminondas and the Lacedæmonians they ranged
themselves with the Lacedæmonians. But after this the Mantineans and
Lacedæmonians were at variance, and the former joined the Achæan
League. And when Agis, the son of Eudamidas, was king of Sparta they
defeated him in self defence by the help of an Achæan force under
Aratus. They also joined the Achæans in the action against Cleomenes,
and helped them in breaking down the power of the Lacedæmonians. And
when Antigonus in Macedonia was Regent for Philip, the father of
Perseus, who was still a boy, and was on most friendly terms with the
Achæans, the Mantineans did several other things in his honour, and
changed the name of their city to Antigonea. And long afterwards, when
Augustus was about to fight the sea fight off the promontory of Apollo
at Actium, the Mantineans fought on his side, though the rest of the
Arcadians took part with Antony, for no other reason I think than that
the Lacedæmonians were on the side of Augustus. And ten generations
afterwards when Adrian was Emperor, he took away from the Mantineans
the imported name of Antigonea and restored the old name of Mantinea.

[24] Iliad, ii. 721-723.

[25] Iliad, xii. 200-208.




CHAPTER IX.


And the Mantinæans have a double temple divided in the middle by a wall
of partition, on one side is the statue of Æsculapius by Alcamenes,
on the other is the temple of Leto and her children. Praxiteles made
statues the third generation after Alcamenes. In the basement are the
Muse and Marsyas with his pipe. There also on a pillar is Polybius
the son of Lycortas, whom we shall mention hereafter. The Mantineans
have also several other temples, as one to Zeus Soter, and another to
Zeus surnamed Bountiful because he gives all good things to mankind,
also one to Castor and Pollux, and in another part of the city one to
Demeter and Proserpine. And they keep a fire continually burning here,
taking great care that it does not go out through inadvertence. I also
saw a temple of Hera near the theatre: the statues are by Praxiteles,
Hera is seated on a throne, and standing by her are Athene and Hebe the
daughter of Hera. And near the altar of Hera is the tomb of Arcas, the
son of Callisto: his remains were brought from Mænalus in accordance
with the oracle at Delphi.

    “Cold is Mæenalia, where Arcas lies
    Who gave his name to all Arcadians.
    Go there I bid you, and with kindly mind
    Remove his body to the pleasant city,
    Where three and four and even five roads meet,
    There build a shrine and sacrifice to Arcas.”

And the place where the tomb of Arcas is they call the altars of the
Sun. And not far from the theatre are some famous tombs, Vesta called
Common a round figure, and they say Antinoe the daughter of Cepheus
lies here. And there is a pillar above another tomb, and a man on
horseback carved on the pillar, Gryllus the son of Xenophon. And behind
the theatre are ruins of a temple of Aphrodite Symmachia and her
statue, and the inscription on the basement of it states that Nicippe
the daughter of Paseas offered it. And this temple was erected by the
Mantineans as a record to posterity of the seafight off Actium fought
by them in conjunction with the Romans. And they worship Athene Alea,
and have a temple and statue of her. They also regard Antinous as a
god, his temple is the latest in Mantinea, he was excessively beloved
by the emperor Adrian. I never saw him alive but have seen statues
and paintings of him. He has also honours elsewhere, and there is a
city near the Nile in Egypt called after him, and the following is
the reason why he was honoured at Mantinea. He belonged by birth to
the town Bithynium in Bithynia beyond the river Sangarius, and the
Bithynians were originally Arcadians from Mantinea. That is why the
Emperor assigned him divine honours at Mantinea, and his rites are
annual, and games are held to him every fifth year. And the Mantineans
have a room in the Gymnasium which has statues of Antinous, and is in
other respects well worth a visit for the precious stones with which
it is adorned and the paintings, most of which are of Antinous and
make him resemble young Dionysus. And moreover there is an imitation
here of the painting at Ceramicus of the action of the Athenians at
Mantinea. And in the market-place the Mantineans have the brazen image
of a woman, who they say is Diomenea the daughter of Arcas, and they
have also the hero-chapel of Podares, who they say fell in the battle
against Epaminondas and the Thebans. But three generations before my
time they changed the inscription on the tomb to suit a descendant and
namesake of Podares, who lived at the period when one could become a
Roman Citizen. But it was the old Podares that the Mantineans in my
time honoured, saying that the bravest (whether of their own men or
their allies) in the battle was Gryllus the son of Xenophon, and next
Cephisodorus of Marathon, who was at that time the Commander of the
Athenian Cavalry, and next Podares.




CHAPTER X.


There are roads leading from Mantinea to the other parts of Arcadia, I
will describe the most notable things to see on each of them. As you
go to Tegea on the left of the highroad near the walls of Mantinea
is a place for horseracing, and at no great distance is the course
where the games to Antinous take place. And above this course is the
Mountain Alesium, so called they say from the wanderings of Rhea, and
on the mountain is a grove of Demeter. And at the extreme end of the
mountain is the temple of Poseidon Hippius, not far from the course
in Mantinea. As to this temple I write what I have heard and what
others have recorded about it. It was built in our day by the Emperor
Adrian, who appointed overseers over the workmen, that no one might
spy into the old temple nor move any portion of its ruins, and he
ordered them to build the new temple round the old one, which was they
say originally built to Poseidon by Agamedes and Trophonius, who made
beams of oak and adjusted them together. And when they kept people
from entering into this temple they put up no barrier in front of the
entrance, but only stretched across a woollen thread, whether they
thought this would inspire fear as people then held divine things in
honour, or that there was some efficacy in this thread. And Æpytus the
son of Hippothous neither leapt over this thread nor crept under it
but broke through it and so entered the temple, and having acted with
impiety was struck blind, (sea water bursting into his eyes from the
outraged god), and soon after died. There is an old tradition that sea
water springs up in this temple. The Athenians have a similar tradition
about their Acropolis, and so have the Carians who dwell at Mylasa
about the temple of their god, whom they call in their native dialect
Osogo. The Athenians are only about 20 stades distant from the sea at
Phalerum, and the seaport for Mylasa is 80 stades from that town, but
the Mantineans are at such a very long distance from the sea that this
is plainly supernatural there.

When you have passed the temple of Poseidon you come to a trophy
in stone erected for a victory over the Lacedæmonians and Agis.
This was the disposition of the battle. On the right wing were the
Mantineans themselves, with an army of all ages under the command of
Podares, the great grandson of that Podares who had fought against
the Thebans. They had also with them the seer from Elis, Thrasybulus
the son of Æneas of the family of the Iamidæ, who prophesied victory
for the Mantineans, and himself took part in the action. The rest
of the Arcadians were posted on the left wing, each town had its
own commander, and Megalopolis had two, Lydiades and Leocydes. And
Aratus with the Sicyonians and Achæans occupied the centre. And Agis
and the Lacedæmonians extended their line of battle that they might
not be outflanked by the enemy, and Agis and his staff occupied the
centre. And Aratus according to preconcerted arrangement with the
Arcadians fell back (he and his army) when the Lacedæmonians pressed
them hard, and as they fell back they formed the shape of a crescent.
And Agis and the Lacedæmonians were keen for victory, and _en masse_
pressed fiercely on Aratus and his division. And they were followed
by the Lacedæmonians on the wings, who thought it would be a great
stepping stone to victory to rout Aratus and his division. But the
Arcadians meanwhile stole upon their flanks, and the Lacedæmonians
being surrounded lost most of their men, and their king Agis the son of
Eudamidas fell. And the Mantineans said that Poseidon appeared helping
them, and that is why they erected their trophy as a votive offering
to Poseidon. That the gods have been present at war and slaughter has
been represented by those who have described the doings and sufferings
of the heroes at Ilium, the Athenian poets have sung also that the gods
took part in the battles at Marathon and Salamis. And manifestly the
army of the Galati perished at Delphi through Apollo and the evident
assistance of divine beings. So the victory here of the Mantineans may
have been largely due to Poseidon. And they say that Leocydes, who with
Lydiades was the general of the division from Megalopolis, was the
ninth descendant from Arcesilaus who lived at Lycosura, of whom the
Arcadians relate the legend that he saw a stag (which was sacred to the
goddess Proserpine) of extreme old age, on whose neck was a collar
with the following inscription,

 “I was a fawn and captured, when Agapenor went to Ilium.”

This tradition shews that the stag is much longer-lived than the
elephant.




CHAPTER XI.


Next to the temple of Poseidon you will come to a place full of oak
trees called Pelagos; there is a road from Mantinea to Tegea through
these oak trees. And the boundary between the districts of Mantinea
and Tegea is the round altar on the highroad. And if you should turn
to the left from the temple of Poseidon, in about five stades you will
come to the tombs of the daughters of Pelias. The people of Mantinea
say they dwelt here to avoid the vituperations which came upon them
for the death of their father. For as soon as Medea came to Iolcos she
forthwith plotted against Pelias, really working for Jason’s interest,
while ostensibly hostile to him. She told the daughters of Pelias
that, if they liked, she could make their father a young man instead
of an old man. So she slew a ram and boiled his flesh with herbs in a
caldron, and she brought the old ram out of the caldron in the shape
of a young man alive. After this she took Pelias to boil and cut him
up, but his daughters got hardly enough of him to take to burial. This
compelled them to go and live in Arcadia, and when they died their
sepulchres were raised here. No poet has given their names so far as I
know, but Mico the painter has written under their portraits the names
Asteropea and Antinoe.

And the place called Phœzon is about 20 stades from these tombs, where
is a tomb with a stone base, rising up somewhat from the ground.
The road is very narrow at this place, and they say it is the tomb
of Areithous, who was called Corynetes from the club which he used
in battle. As you go about 30 stades along the road from Mantinea
to Pallantium, the oak plantation called Pelagos extends along the
highroad, and here the cavalry of the Mantineans and Athenians fought
against the Bœotian cavalry. And the Mantineans say that Epaminondas
was killed here by Machærion a Mantinean, but the Lacedæmonians say
that the Machærion who killed Epaminondas was a Spartan. But the
Athenian account, corroborated by the Thebans, is that Epaminondas was
mortally wounded by Gryllus: and this corresponds with the painting of
the action at Mantinea. The Mantineans also seem to have given Gryllus
a public funeral, and erected to him his statue on a pillar where he
fell as the bravest man in the allied army: whereas Machærion, though
the Lacedæmonians mention him, had no special honours paid to him as a
brave man, either at Sparta or at Mantinea. And when Epaminondas was
wounded they removed him yet alive out of the line of battle. And for a
time he kept his hand on his wound, and gasped for breath, and looked
earnestly at the fight, and the place where he kept so looking they
called ever after Scope, (_Watch_), but when the battle was over then
he took his hand from the wound and expired, and they buried him on the
field of battle. And there is a pillar on his tomb, and a shield above
it with a dragon as its device. The dragon is intended to intimate that
Epaminondas was one of those who are called the Sparti, the seed of
the dragon’s teeth. And there are two pillars on his tomb, one ancient
with a Bœotian inscription, and the other erected by the Emperor Adrian
with an inscription by him upon it. As to Epaminondas one might praise
him as one of the most famous Greek generals for talent in war, indeed
second to none. For the Lacedæmonian and Athenian generals were aided
by the ancient renown of their states and the spirit of their soldiers:
but the Thebans were dejected and used to obey other Greek states when
Epaminondas in a short time put them into a foremost position.

Epaminondas had been warned by the oracle at Delphi before this to
beware of Pelagos. Taking this word in its usual meaning of the sea
he was careful not to set foot on a trireme or transport: but Apollo
evidently meant this oak plantation Pelagos and not the sea. Places
bearing the same name deceived Hannibal the Carthaginian later on, and
the Athenians still earlier. For Hannibal had an oracle from Ammon
that he would die and be buried in Libyssa. Accordingly he hoped that
he would destroy the power of Rome, and return home to Libya and die
there in old age. But when Flaminius the Roman made all diligence to
take him alive, he went to the court of Prusias as a suppliant, and
being rejected by him mounted his horse, and in drawing his sword
wounded his finger. And he had not gone on many stades when a fever
from the wound came on him, and he died the third day after, and the
place where he died was called Libyssa by the people of Nicomedia.
The oracle at Dodona also told the Athenians to colonize Sicily. Now
not far from Athens is a small hill called Sicily. And they, not
understanding that it was this Sicily that the oracle referred to, were
induced to go on expeditions beyond their borders and to engage in the
fatal war against Syracuse. And one might find other similar cases to
these.




CHAPTER XII.


And about a stade from the tomb of Epaminondas is a temple of Zeus
surnamed Charmo. In the Arcadian oak-plantations there are different
kinds of oaks, some they call broadleaved, and others they call fegi. A
third kind have a thin bark so light, that they make of it floats for
anchors and nets. The bark of this kind of oak is called cork by some
of the Ionians and by Hermesianax the Elegiac Poet.

From Mantinea a road leads to the village Methydrium, formerly a town,
now included in Megalopolis. When you have gone 30 stades further
you come to the plain called Alcimedon, and above it is the mountain
Ostracina, where the cave is where Alcimedon, one of the men called
Heroes, used to dwell. Hercules according to the tradition of the
Phigalians had an intrigue with Phialo, the daughter of this Alcimedon.
When Alcimedon found out she was a mother he exposed her and her boy
immediately after his birth on the mountain. Æchmagoras was the name
given to the boy according to the Arcadians. And the boy crying out
when he was exposed, the bird called the jay heard his wailing and
imitated it. And Hercules happening to pass by heard the jay, and
thinking it was the cry of his boy and not the bird, turned at the
sound, and when he perceived Phialo he loosed her from her bonds and
saved the boy’s life. From that time the well has been called Jay
from the bird. And about 40 stades from this well is the place called
Petrosaca, the boundary between Megalopolis and Mantinea.

Besides the roads I have mentioned there are two that lead to
Orchomenus, and in one of them is what is called Ladas’ course, where
he used to practise for running, and near it is a temple of Artemis,
and on the right of the road a lofty mound which they say is the tomb
of Penelope, differing from what is said about her in the Thesprotian
Poem. For in it she is represented as having borne a son Ptoliporthes
to Odysseus after his return from Troy. But the tradition of the
Mantineans about her is that she was detected by Odysseus in having
encouraged the suitors to the house, and therefore sent away by him,
and that she forthwith departed to Lacedæmon, and afterwards migrated
to Mantinea, and there died. And near this tomb is a small plain, and
a hill on it with some ruins still remaining of old Mantinea, and the
place is called _The Town_ to this day. And as you go on in a Northerly
direction, you soon come to the well of Alalcomenea. And about 30
stades from _The Town_ are the ruins of a place called Mæra, if indeed
Mæra was buried here and not at Tegea: for the most probable tradition
is that Mæra, the daughter of Atlas, was buried at Tegea and not at
Mantinea. But perhaps it was another Mæra, a descendant of the Mæra
that was the daughter of Atlas, that came to Mantinea.

There still remains the road which leads to Orchomenus, on which is
the mountain Anchisia, and the tomb of Anchises at the foot of the
mountain. For when Æneas was crossing to Sicily he landed in Laconia,
and founded the towns Aphrodisias and Etis, and his father Anchises
for some reason or other coming to this place and dying there was also
buried at the foot of the mountain called Anchisia after him. And this
tradition is confirmed by the fact that the Æolians who now inhabit
Ilium nowhere shew in their country the tomb of Anchises. And near the
tomb of Anchises are ruins of a temple of Aphrodite, and Anchisia is
the boundary between the districts of Mantinea and Orchomenus.




CHAPTER XIII.


In the part belonging to Orchomenus, on the left of the road from
Anchisia, on the slope of the mountain is a temple to Hymnian Artemis,
in whose worship the Mantineans also share. The goddess has both a
priestess and priest, who not only have no intercourse with one another
by marriage, but all their life long keep separate in other respects.
They have neither baths nor meals together as most people do, nor do
they ever go into a stranger’s house. I know that similar habits are
found among the priests of Ephesian Artemis, called by themselves
Histiatores but by the citizens Essenes, but they are only kept up for
one year and no longer. To Hymnian Artemis they also hold an annual
festival.

The old town of Orchomenus was on the top of a hill, and there are
still ruins of the walls and market-place. But the town in our day
is under the circuit of the old walls. And among the notable sights
are a well, from which they get their water, and temples of Poseidon
and Aphrodite, and their statues in stone. And near the town is a
wooden statue of Artemis in a large cedar-tree, whence the goddess is
called Artemis of the Cedar-tree. And below the town are some heaps
of stones apart from one another, which were erected to some men who
fell in war, but who they fought against, whether Arcadians or any
other Peloponnesians, neither do the inscriptions on the tombs nor any
traditions of the people of Orchomenus record.

And opposite the town is the mountain called Trachys. And rainwater
flows through a hollow ravine between Orchomenus and Mount Trachys,
and descends into another plain belonging to Orchomenus. This plain
is not very large, and most of it is marsh. And as you go on about
three stades from Orchomenus, a straight road takes you to the town
of Caphya by the ravine, and after that on the left hand by the marsh.
And another road, after you have crossed the water that flows through
the ravine, takes you under the mountain Trachys. And on this road the
first thing you come to is the tomb of Aristocrates, who violated the
priestess of Artemis Hymnia. And next to the tomb of Aristocrates are
the wells called Teneæ, and about 7 stades further is a place called
Amilus, which they say was formerly a town. At this place the road
branches off into two directions, one towards Stymphelus, and the
other towards Pheneus. And as you go to Pheneus a mountain will lie
before you, which is the joint boundary for Orchomenus and Pheneus and
Caphya. And a lofty precipice called the Caphyatic rock projects from
the mountain. Next to the boundary I have mentioned is a ravine, and a
road leads through it to Pheneus. And in the middle of this ravine some
water comes out from a fountain, and at the end of the ravine is the
town of Caryæ.




CHAPTER XIV.


And the plain of Pheneus lies below Caryæ, and they say the old
Pheneus was destroyed by a deluge: even in our day there are marks
on the hills where the water rose to. And about 5 stades from Caryæ
are the mountains Oryxis and Sciathis, at the bottom of each of which
mountains is a pit which receives the water from the plain. And these
pits the people of Pheneus say are wrought by hand, for they were
made by Hercules when he lived at Pheneus with Laonome, the mother
of Amphitryon, for Amphitryon was the son of Alcæus by Laonome, the
daughter of Gyneus a woman of Pheneus, and not by Lysidice the daughter
of Pelops. And if Hercules really dwelt at Pheneus, one may easily
suppose that, when he was expelled from Tiryns by Eurystheus, he did
not go immediately to Thebes but first to Pheneus. Hercules also dug
through the middle of the plain of Pheneus a channel for the river
Olbius, which river some of the Arcadians call Aroanius and not Olbius.
The length of this canal is about 50 stades, and the depth where the
banks have not fallen in about 30 feet. The river however does not
now follow this channel, but has returned to its old channel, having
deserted Hercules’ canal.

And from the pits dug at the bottom of the mountains I have mentioned
to Pheneus is about 50 stades. The people of Pheneus say that Pheneus
an Autochthon was their founder. Their citadel is precipitous on all
sides, most of it is left undefended, but part of it is carefully
fortified. On the citadel is a temple of Athene Tritonia, but only in
ruins. And there is a brazen statue of Poseidon Hippius, an offering
they say of Odysseus. For he lost his horses and went all over Greece
in quest of them, and finding them on this spot in Pheneus he erected
a temple there to Artemis under the title of Heurippe, and offered the
statue of Poseidon Hippius. They say also that when Odysseus found
his horses here he thought he would keep them at Pheneus, as he kept
his oxen on the mainland opposite Ithaca. And the people of Pheneus
shew some letters written on the base of the statue, which are the
orders of Odysseus to those who looked after his horses. In all other
respects there seems probability in the tradition of the people of
Pheneus, but I cannot think that the brazen statue of Poseidon is an
offering of Odysseus, for they did not in those days know how to make
statues throughout in brass as you weave a garment. Their mode of
making statues in brass I have already shewn in my account of Sparta in
reference to the statue of Zeus Supreme. For the first who fused and
made statues of cast brass were Rhœcus the son of Philæus and Theodorus
the son of Telecles both of Samos. The most famous work of Theodorus
was the seal carved out of an Emerald, which Polycrates the tyrant of
Samos very frequently wore and was very proud of.

And as you descend about a stade from the citadel you come to the tomb
of Iphicles, the brother of Hercules and the father of Iolaus, on an
eminence. Iolaus according to the tradition of the Greeks assisted
Hercules in most of his Labours. And Iphicles the father of Iolaus,
when Hercules fought his first battle against Augeas and the people of
Elis, was wounded by the sons of Actor who were called Molinidæ from
their mother Moline, and his relations conveyed him to Pheneus in a
very bad condition, and there Buphagus (a native of Pheneus) and his
wife Promne took care of him, and buried him as he died of his wound.
And to this day they pay him the honours they pay to heroes. And of
the gods the people of Pheneus pay most regard to Hermes, and they
call their games Hermæa. And they have a temple of Hermes, and a stone
statue of the god made by the Athenian Euchir the son of Eubulides.
And behind the temple is the tomb of Myrtilus. This Myrtilus was, the
Greeks say, the son of Hermes, and charioteer to Œnomaus, and when
any one came to court the daughter of Œnomaus, Myrtilus ingeniously
spurred the horses of Œnomaus, and, whenever he caught up any suitor
in the race, he hurled a dart at him and so killed him. And Myrtilus
himself was enamoured of Hippodamia, but did not venture to compete
for her hand, but continued Œnomaus’ charioteer. But eventually they
say he betrayed Œnomaus, seduced by the oaths that Pelops made to him,
that if he won he would let Myrtilus enjoy Hippodamia one night. But
when he reminded Pelops of his oath he threw him out of a ship into the
sea. And the dead body of Myrtilus was washed ashore, and taken up and
buried by the people of Pheneus, so they say, and annually by night
they pay him honours. Clearly Pelops cannot have had much sea to sail
on, except from the mouth of the Alpheus to the seaport of Elis. The
Myrtoan Sea cannot therefore have been named after this Myrtilus, for
it begins at Eubœa and joins the Ægean by the desert island of Helene,
but those who seem to me to interpret best the antiquities of Eubœa say
that the Myrtoan Sea got its name from a woman called Myrto.




CHAPTER XV.


At Pheneus they have also a temple of Eleusinian Demeter, and they
celebrate the rites of the goddess just the same as at Eleusis,
according to their statement. For they say that Naus, who was the
great grandson of Eumolpus, came to them in obedience to the oracle
at Delphi, _and brought these mysteries_. And near the temple of
Eleusinian Demeter is what is called Petroma, two large stones fitting
into one another. And they celebrate here annually what they call
their great rites, they detach these stones, and take from them some
writings relative to these rites, and when they have read them in the
ears of the initiated they replace them again the same night. And
I know that most of the inhabitants of Pheneus regard “By Petroma”
their most solemn oath. And there is a round covering on Petroma with
a likeness of Cidarian Demeter inside, the priest puts this likeness
on his robes at what they call the great rites, when according to the
tradition he strikes the earth with rods and summons the gods of the
lower world. The people of Pheneus also have a tradition that before
Naus Demeter came here in the course of her wanderings, and to all
the people of Pheneus that received her hospitably the goddess gave
other kinds of pulse but no beans. Why they do not consider beans a
pure kind of pulse, is a sacred tradition. Those who according to the
tradition of the people of Pheneus received the goddess were Trisaules
and Damithales, and they built a temple to Demeter Thesmia under Mount
Cyllene, where they established her rites as they are now celebrated.
And this temple is about 15 stades from Pheneus.

As you go on about 15 stades from Pheneus in the direction of Pellene
and Ægira in Achaia, you come to a temple of Pythian Apollo, of which
there are only ruins, and a large altar in white stone. The people
of Pheneus still sacrifice here to Apollo and Artemis, and say that
Hercules built the temple after the capture of Elis. There are also
here the tombs of the heroes who joined Hercules in the expedition
against Elis and were killed in the battle. And Telamon is buried
very near the river Aroanius, at a little distance from the temple of
Apollo, and Chalcodon not far from the well called Œnoe’s well. As one
was the father of that Elephenor who led the Eubœans to Ilium, and
the other the father of Ajax and Teucer, no one will credit that they
fell in this battle. For how could Chalcodon have assisted Hercules in
this affair, since Amphitryon is declared to have slain him earlier
according to Theban information that we can rely on? And how would
Teucer have founded Salamis in Cyprus, if nobody had banished him from
home on his return from Troy? And who but Telamon could have banished
him? Manifestly therefore Chalcodon from Eubœa and Telamon from Ægina
could not have taken part with Hercules in this expedition against
Elis: they must have been obscure men of the same name as those famous
men, a casual coincidence such as has happened in all ages.

The people of Pheneus have more than one boundary between them and
Achaia. One is the river called Porinas in the direction of Pellene,
the other is a temple sacred to Artemis in the direction of Ægira. And
in the territory of Pheneus after the temple of Pythian Apollo you will
soon come to the road that leads to the mountain Crathis, in which the
river Crathis has its rise, which flows into the sea near Ægæ, a place
deserted in our day but in older days a town in Achaia. And from this
Crathis the river in Italy in the district of Bruttii gets its name.
And on Mount Crathis there is a temple to Pyronian Artemis: from whose
shrine the Argives in olden times introduced fire into the district
about Lerne.




CHAPTER XVI.


And as you go eastwards from Pheneus you come to the promontory of
Geronteum, and by it is a road. And Geronteum is the boundary between
the districts of Pheneus and Stymphelus. And as you leave Geronteum
on the left and go through the district of Pheneus you come to the
mountains called Tricrena, where there are three wells. In these they
say the mountain nymphs washed Hermes when he was born, and so they
consider these wells sacred to Hermes. And not far from Tricrena is
another hill called Sepia, and here they say Æpytus the son of Elatus
died of the bite of a serpent, and here they buried him, for they
could not carry his dead body further. These serpents are still (the
Arcadians say) to be found on the hill but in no great quantity, for
every year much of it is covered with snow, and those serpents that
the snow catches outside of their holes are killed by it, and if
they first get back to their holes, yet the snow kills part of them
even there, as the bitter cold sometimes penetrates to their holes.
I was curious to see the tomb of Æpytus, because Homer mentions it
in his lines about the Arcadians.[26] It is a pile of earth not very
high, surrounded by a coping of stone. It was likely to inspire wonder
in Homer as he had seen no more notable tomb. For when he compared
the dancing-ground wrought by Hephæstus on Achilles’ shield to the
dancing-ground made by Dædalus for Ariadne,[27] it was because he had
seen nothing more clever. And though I know many wonderful tombs I
will only mention two, one in Halicarnassus and one in the land of
the Hebrews. The one in Halicarnassus was built for Mausolus king of
Halicarnassus, and is so large and wonderful in all its adornation,
that the Romans in their admiration of it call all notable tombs
Mausoleums. And the Hebrews have in the city of Jerusalem, which has
been rased to the ground by the Roman Emperor, a tomb of Helen a
woman of that country, which is so contrived that the door, which is
of stone like all the rest of the tomb, cannot be opened except on
one particular day and month of the year. And then it opens by the
machinery alone, and keeps open for some little time and then shuts
again. But at any other time of the year anyone trying to open it could
not do so, you would have to smash it before you could open it.




CHAPTER XVII.


Not far from the tomb of Æpytus is Cyllene the highest of the mountains
in Arcadia, and the ruins of a temple of Cyllenian Hermes on the top
of the mountain. It is clear that both the mountain and god got their
title from Cyllen the son of Elatus. And men of old, as far as we can
ascertain, had various kinds of wood out of which they made statues,
as ebony, cypress, cedar, oak, yew, lotus. But the statue of Cyllenian
Hermes is made of none of these but of the wood of the juniper tree.
It is about 8 feet high I should say. Cyllene has the following
phenomenon. Blackbirds all-white lodge in it. Those that are called
by the Bœotians by the same name are a different kind of bird, and
are not vocal. The white eagles that resemble swans very much and are
called swan-eagles I have seen on Sipylus near the marsh of Tantalus,
and individuals have got from Thrace before now white boars and white
bears. And white hares are bred in Libya, and white deer I have myself
seen and admired in Rome, but where they came from, whether from the
mainland or islands, it did not occur to me to inquire. Let this much
suffice relative to the blackbirds of Mount Cyllene, that no one may
discredit what I have said about their colour.

And next to Cyllene is another mountain called Chelydorea, where Hermes
found the tortoise, which he is said to have skinned and made a lyre
of. Chelydorea is the boundary between the districts of Pheneus and
Pellene, and the Achæans graze their flocks on most of it.

And as you go westwards from Pheneus the road to the left leads to the
city Clitor, that to the right to Nonacris and the water of the Styx.
In old times Nonacris, which took its name from the wife of Lycaon, was
a small town in Arcadia, but in our day it is in ruins, nor are many
portions even of the ruins easy to trace. And not far from the ruins
is a cliff, I do not remember to have seen another so high. And water
drops from it which the Greeks call the Styx.

[26] Iliad, ii. 604.

[27] Iliad, xviii. 590-592.




CHAPTER XVIII.


Hesiod has represented Styx in his Theogony, (for there are some who
assign the Theogony to Hesiod), as the daughter of Oceanus and the wife
of Pallas. Linus too they say has represented the same. But the verses
of Linus (all of which I have read) seem to me spurious. Epimenides the
Cretan also has represented Styx as the daughter of Oceanus, but not
as the wife of Pallas, but of Piras, whoever he was, to whom she bare
Echidna. And Homer has frequently introduced the Styx into his poetry.
For example in the oath of Hera,

    “Witness me now Earth and high Heaven above
    And water of the Styx, that trickles down.”[28]

Here he represents the water of the Styx dripping down as you may see
it. But in the catalogue of those who went with Guneus he makes the
water of the Styx flow into the river Titaresius.[29] He has also
represented the Styx as a river of Hades, and Athene says that Zeus
does not remember that she saved Hercules in it in one of the Labours
imposed by Eurystheus.

    “For could I have foreseen what since has chanced,
    When he was sent to Hades jailor dread
    To bring from Erebus dread Hades’ Cerberus,
    He would not have escaped the streams of Styx.”
                                   (Il. viii. 366-369.)

Now the water that drips from the cliff near Nonacris falls first upon
a lofty rock, and oozes through it into the river Crathis, and its
water is deadly both to man and beast. It is said also that it was
deadly to goats who first drank of the water. But in time this was well
known, as well as other mysterious properties of the water. Glass and
crystal and porcelain, and various articles made of stone, and pottery
ware, are broken by the water of the Styx. And things made of horn,
bone, iron, brass, lead, tin, silver, and amber, melt when put into
this water. Gold also suffers from it as all other metals, although one
can purify gold from rust, as the Lesbian poetess Sappho testifies, and
as anyone can test by experiment. The deity has as it seems granted to
things which are least esteemed the property of being masters of things
held in the highest value. For pearls are melted by vinegar, and the
adamant, which is the hardest of stones, is melted by goat’s blood.
A horse’s hoof alone is proof against the water of the Styx, for if
poured into a hoof the hoof is not broken. Whether Alexander the son of
Philip really died of this poisonous water of the Styx I do not know,
but there is a tradition to that effect.

Beyond Nonacris there are some mountains called Aroania and a cave
in them, into which they say the daughters of Prœtus fled when they
went mad, till Melampus brought them back to a place called Lusi,
and cured them by secret sacrifices and purifications. The people of
Pheneus graze their flocks on most of the mountains Aroania, but Lusi
is on the borders of Clitor. It was they say formerly a town, and
Agesilaus a native of it was proclaimed victor with a race-horse, when
the Amphictyones celebrated the eleventh Pythiad, but in our days there
are not even any ruins of it in existence. So the daughters of Prœtus
were brought back by Melampus to Lusi, and healed of their madness in
the temple of Artemis, and ever since the people of Clitor call Artemis
Hemerasia.

[28] Iliad, xv. 36, 37.

[29] Iliad, ii. 748-751.




CHAPTER XIX.


And there are some of Arcadian race who live at Cynætha, who erected
at Olympia a statue of Zeus with a thunderbolt in each hand. Cynætha
is about 40 stades from the temple of Artemis, and in the market-place
are some altars of the gods, and a statue of the Emperor Adrian. But
the most memorable thing there is a temple of Dionysus. They keep the
festival of the god in wintertime, when men smeared all over with oil
pick a bull from the herd, which the god puts it into their mind to
take and convey to the temple, where they offer it in sacrifice. And
there is a well there of cold water, about two stades from the town,
and a plane-tree growing by it. Whoever is bitten by a mad dog, or has
received any other hurt, if he drinks of this water gets cured, and
for this reason they call the well Alyssus. Thus the water called Styx
near Pheneus in Arcadia is for man’s hurt, whereas the water at Cynætha
is exactly the reverse for man’s cure. Of the roads in a westward
direction from Pheneus there remains that on the left which leads to
Clitor, and is by the canal which Hercules dug for the river Aroanius.
The road along this canal goes to Lycuria, which is the boundary
between the districts of Pheneus and Clitor.




CHAPTER XX.


And after having advanced from Lycuria about 50 stades you will come
to the springs of the river Ladon. I have heard that the water of the
marsh at Pheneus, after falling into the pits under the mountains,
reappears here, and forms the springs of Ladon. I am not prepared to
say whether this is so or not. But the river Ladon excels all the
rivers in Greece for the beauty of its stream, and is also famous
in connection with what poets have sung about Daphne. The tradition
current about Daphne among those who live on the banks of the Orontes
I pass over, but the following is the tradition both in Arcadia and
Elis. Œnomaus the ruler at Pisa had a son Leucippus who was enamoured
of Daphne, and hotly wooed her for his wife, but discovered that she
had a dislike to all males. So he contrived the following stratagem.
He let his hair grow to the Alpheus,[30] and put on woman’s dress and
went to Daphne with his hair arranged like a girl’s, and said he was
the daughter of Œnomaus, and would like to go a hunting with Daphne.
And being reckoned a girl, and excelling all the other girls in the
lustre of his family and skill in hunting, and paying the greatest
possible attention to Daphne, he soon won her strong friendship. But
they who sing of Apollo’s love for Daphne add that Apollo was jealous
of Leucippus’ happiness in love. So when Daphne and the other maidens
desired to bathe in the Ladon and swim about, they stripped Leucippus
against his will, and discovering his sex they stabbed him and killed
him with javelins and daggers. So the story goes.




CHAPTER XXI.


From the springs of Ladon it is 60 stades to the town of Clitor, the
road is a narrow path by the river Aroanius. And near the town you
cross a river called Clitor, which flows into the Aroanius about 7
stades from the town. There are various kinds of fish in the river
Aroanius, especially some variegated ones which have they say a voice
like the thrush. I have seen them caught but never heard their voice,
though I have waited by the riverside till sunset, when they are said
to be most vocal.

The town of Clitor got its name from the son of Azan, and is situated
in a plain with hills not very high all round it. The most notable
temples are those to Demeter, and Æsculapius, and to Ilithyia. Homer
says there are several Ilithyias, but does not specify their number.
But the Lycian Olen, who was earlier than Homer, and wrote Hymns to
Ilithyia and for the Delians, says that she was the same as Fate, and
older than Cronos. And he calls her Eulinus. The people of Clitor have
also a temple, about 4 stades from the town, to Castor and Pollux under
the name of the Great Gods, their statues are of brass. And on the
crest of a hill about 30 stades from Clitor is a temple and statue of
Athene Coria.

[30] Probably on the pretext that he meant to shear his hair to the
Alpheus. See i. 37; viii. 41.




CHAPTER XXII.


I return to Stymphelus and to Geronteum, the boundary between the
districts of Pheneus and Stymphelus. The people of Stymphelus are no
longer ranked as Arcadians, but are in the Argolic League from their
own choice. But that they are of Arcadian race is testified by Homer,
and Stymphelus, the founder of the town, was great grandson of Arcas,
the son of Callisto. He is said originally to have built the town on
another site than that it now occupies. In old Stymphelus lived they
say Temenus the son of Pelasgus, who brought up Hera, and built three
temples to the goddess and called her by three titles, when she was
still a maiden the Child-goddess, and after she was married to Zeus
he called her the Full-grown, and after she broke with Zeus for some
reason or other and returned to Stymphelus he called her the Widow.
This is the tradition about the goddess at Stymphelus. But the town
in our day has none of these temples, though it has the following
remarkable things. There is a spring from which the Emperor Adrian
conveyed water to the town of Corinth. In winter this spring converts
a small marsh into the river Stymphelus, but in summer the marsh is
dry, and the river is only fed by the spring. This river soaks into the
ground, and comes up again in Argolis, where its name is changed to
Erasinus. About this river Stymphelus there is a tradition that some
man-eating birds lived on its banks, whom Hercules is said to have
killed with his arrows. But Pisander of Camirus says that Hercules did
not kill them but only frightened them away with the noise of rattles.
The desert of Arabia has among other monsters some birds called
Stymphelides, who are as savage to men as lions and leopards. They
attack those who come to capture them, and wound them with their beaks
and kill them. They pierce through coats of mail that men wear, and
if they put on thick robes of mat, the beaks of these birds penetrate
them too, as the wings of little birds stick in bird-lime. Their size
is about that of the crane, and they are like storks, but their beaks
are stronger and not crooked like those of storks. Whether these birds
now in Arabia, that have the same name as those formerly in Arcadia,
are similar in appearance I do not know, but if there have been in all
time these Stymphelides like hawks and eagles, then they are probably
of Arabian origin, and some of them may formerly have flown from Arabia
to Stymphelus in Arcadia. They may also have been originally called
some other name than Stymphelides by the Arabians: and the fame of
Hercules, and the superiority of the Greeks to the barbarians, may
have made the name Stymphelides prevail to our day over their former
name in the desert of Arabia. At Stymphelus there is also an ancient
temple of Stymphelian Artemis, the statue is wooden but most of it
gilt over. And on the roof of the temple is a representation of these
birds called Stymphelides. It is difficult to decide whether it is in
wood or plaster, but I conjecture more likely in wood than plaster.
There are also represented some maidens in white stone with legs like
birds, standing behind the temple. And in our days a wonderful thing
is said to have happened. They were celebrating at Stymphelus the
festival of Stymphelian Artemis rather negligently, and violating most
of the established routine, when a tree fell at the opening of the
cavity where the river Stymphelus goes underground, and blocked up the
passage, so that the plain became a marsh for 400 stades. And they
say that a hunter was pursuing a fleeing deer, and it jumped into the
swamp, and the hunter in the heat of the chase jumped in after it: and
it swallowed up both deer and man. And they say the water of the river
followed them, so that in a day the whole water in the plain was dried
up, _they having opened a way for it_. And since that time they have
celebrated the festival of Artemis with greater ardour.




CHAPTER XXIII.


And next to Stymphelus comes Alea a town in the Argolic league, founded
they say by Aleus the son of Aphidas. There are temples here of
Ephesian Artemis and Alean Athene, and a temple and statue of Dionysus.
They celebrate annually the festival of Dionysus called Scieria, in
which according to an oracle from Delphi the women are flogged, as the
Spartan boys are flogged at the temple of Orthia.

I have shewn in my account of Orchomenus that the straight road is by
the ravine, and that there is another on the left of the lake. And
in the plain of Caphyæ there is a reservoir, by which the water from
the territory of Orchomenus is kept in, so as not to harm the fertile
district. And within this reservoir some other water, in volume nearly
as large as a river, is absorbed in the ground and comes up again at
what is called Nasi, near a village called Rheunos, and it forms there
the perennial river called Tragus. The town gets its name clearly from
Cepheus the son of Aleus, but the name Caphyæ has prevailed through the
Arcadian dialect. And the inhabitants trace their origin to Attica,
they say they were expelled by Ægeus from Athens and fled to Arcadia,
and supplicated Cepheus to allow them to dwell there. The town is at
the end of the plain at the foot of some not very high hills, and has
temples of Poseidon and of Cnacalesian Artemis, so called from the
mountain Cnacalus where the goddess has annual rites. A little above
the town is a well and by it a large and beautiful plane-tree, which
they call Menelaus’, for they say that when he was mustering his army
against Troy he came here and planted it by the well, and in our day
they call the well as well as the plane-tree Menelaus’. And if we may
credit the traditions of the Greeks about old trees still alive and
flourishing, the oldest is the willow in the temple of Hera at Samos,
and next it the oak at Dodona, and the olive in the Acropolis and at
Delos, and the Syrians would assign the third place for its antiquity
to their laurel, and of all others this plane-tree is the most ancient.

About a stade from Caphyæ is the place Condylea, where was a grove
and temple in olden times to Artemis of Condylea. But the goddess
changed her title they say for the following reason. Some children
playing about the temple, how many is not recorded, came across a rope,
and bound it round the neck of the statue, and said that they would
strangle Artemis. And the people of Caphyæ when they found out what
had been done by the children stoned them, and in consequence of this
a strange disorder came upon the women, who prematurely gave birth
to dead children, till the Pythian Priestess told them to bury the
children who had been stoned, and annually to bestow on them funeral
rites, for they had not been slain justly. The people of Caphyæ obeyed
the oracle and still do, and ever since call the goddess, (this they
also refer to the oracle), Apanchomene (_strangled_). When you have
ascended from Caphyæ seven stades you descend to Nasi, and fifty
stades further is the river Ladon. And when you have crossed it you
will come to the oak-coppice Soron, between Argeathæ and Lycuntes and
Scotane. Soron is on the road to Psophis, and it and all the Arcadian
oak-coppices shelter various wild animals, as boars and bears, and
immense tortoises, from which you could make lyres as large as those
made from the Indian tortoise. And at the end of Soron are the ruins of
a village called Paus, and at no great distance is what is called Siræ,
the boundary between the districts of Clitor and Psophis.




CHAPTER XXIV.


The founder of Psophis was they say Psophis the son of Arrho, (the
son of Erymanthus, the son of Aristas, the son of Parthaon, the son
of Periphetes, the son of Nyctimus): others say Psophis the daughter
of Xanthus, the son of Erymanthus, the son of Arcas. This is the
Arcadian account. But the truest tradition is that Psophis was the
daughter of Eryx, the ruler in Sicania, who would not receive her
into his house as she was pregnant, but intrusted her to Lycortas,
a friend of his who dwelt at Phegia, which was called Erymanthus
before the reign of Phegeus: and Echephron and Promachus (her sons by
Hercules) who were brought up there changed the name of Phegia into
Psophis after their mother’s name. The citadel at Zacynthus is also
named Psophis, for the first settler who sailed over to that island
was from Psophis, Zacynthus the son of Dardanus. From Siræ Psophis is
about 30 stades, and the river Aroanius, and at a little distance the
Erymanthus, flow by the town. The Erymanthus has its sources in the
mountain Lampea, which is they say sacred to Pan, and may be a part
of Mount Erymanthus. Homer has represented Erymanthus as a hunter on
Taygetus and Erymanthus, and a lover of Lampea, and as passing through
Arcadia, (leaving the mountain Pholoe on the right and Thelpusa on the
left), and becoming a tributary of the Alpheus. And it is said that
Hercules at the orders of Eurystheus hunted the boar (which exceeded
all others in size and strength), on the banks of the Erymanthus. And
the people of Cumæ in the Opic territory say that some boar’s teeth
which they have stored up in the temple of Apollo are the teeth of this
Erymanthian boar, but their tradition has little probability in it.
And the people of Psophis have a temple of Aphrodite surnamed Erycina,
which is now only in ruins, and was built (so the story goes) by the
sons of Psophis, which is not improbable. For there is in Sicily in
the country near Mount Eryx a temple of Aphrodite Erycina, most holy
from its hoary antiquity and as wealthy as the temple at Paphos. And
there are still traces of hero-chapels of Promachus and Echephron
the sons of Psophis. And at Psophis Alcmæon the son of Amphiaraus is
buried, whose tomb is neither very large nor beautified, except by some
cypress trees which grow to such a height, that the hill near is shaded
by them. These trees are considered sacred to Alcmæon so that the
people will not cut them down, and the people of the place call them
Maidens. Alcmæon came to Psophis, when he fled from Argos after slaying
his mother, and there married Alphesibœa the daughter of Phegeus,
(from whom Psophis was still called Phegia), and gave her gifts as
was usual and among others the famous necklace. And as while he dwelt
in Arcadia his madness became no better, he consulted the oracle at
Delphi, and the Pythian Priestess informed him that the Avenger of
his mother Eriphyle would follow him to every place except to a spot
which was most recent, and made by the action of the sea since he had
stained himself with his mother’s blood. And he found a place which the
Achelous had made by silting and dwelt there, and married Callirhoe the
daughter of Achelous according to the tradition of the Acarnanians,
and had by her two sons Acarnan and Amphoterus, from the former of
whom the Acarnanians on the mainland got their present name, for they
were before called Curetes. And many men and still more women come to
grief through foolish desires. Callirhoe desired that the necklace of
Eriphyle should be hers, and so she sent Alcmæon against his will into
Phegia, where his death was treacherously compassed by Temenus and
Axion, the sons of Phegeus, who are said to have offered the necklace
to Apollo at Delphi. And it was during their reign in the town then
called Phegia that the Greeks went on the expedition against Troy, in
which the people of Psophis say they took no part, because the leaders
of the Argives had an hostility with their kings, as most of them
were relations of Alcmæon and had shared in his expedition against
Thebes. And the reason why the islands called the Echinades formed by
the Achelous got separated from the mainland, was because when the
Ætolians were driven out the land became deserted, and, as Ætolia was
uncultivated, the Achelous did not deposit as much mud as usual. What
confirms my account is that the Mæander, that flowed for so many
years through the arable parts of Phrygia and Caria, in a short time
converted the sea between Priene and Miletus into mainland. The people
of Psophis also have a temple and statue on the banks of the Erymanthus
to the River-God Erymanthus. Except the Nile in Egypt all River-Gods
have statues in white stone, but the Nile, as it flows through Ethiopia
to the sea, has its statues generally made of black stone.

The tradition that I have heard at Psophis about Aglaus, a native of
the town who was a contemporary of the Lydian Crœsus, that he was happy
all his life, I cannot credit. No doubt one man will have less trouble
than another, as one ship will suffer less from tempests than another
ship: but that a man should always stand aloof from misfortune, or
that a ship should never encounter a storm, is a thing which does not
answer to human experience. Even Homer has represented one jar placed
by Zeus full of blessings, and another full of woes,[31] instructed
by the oracle at Delphi, which had informed him that he would be both
unfortunate and fortunate, as born for both fortunes.

[31] Iliad, xxiv. 527-533.




CHAPTER XXV.


On the road from Psophis to Thelpusa the first place you come to is on
the left of the river Ladon and called Tropæa, and close to it is the
oak-coppice called Aphrodisium, and thirdly you come to some ancient
writing on a pillar which forms the boundary between the territory of
Psophis and Thelpusa. In the district of Thelpusa is a river called
Arsen, after crossing which you will come about 25 stades further to
the ruins of a village called Caus, and a temple of Causian Æsculapius
built by the wayside. Thelpusa is about 40 stades from this temple, and
was called they say after the River-Nymph Thelpusa, the daughter of
Ladon. The river Ladon has its source, as I have already stated, in the
neighbourhood of Clitor, and flows first by Lucasium and Mesoboa and
Nasi to Oryx and what is called Halus, and thence to Thaliades and the
temple of Eleusinian Demeter close to Thelpusa, which has statues in it
no less than 7 feet high of Demeter, Proserpine, and Dionysus, all in
stone. And next to this temple of Eleusinian Demeter the river Ladon
flows on leaving Thelpusa on the left, which lies on a lofty ridge,
and has now few inhabitants, indeed the market-place which is now at
the end of the town was originally they say in the very centre. There
is also at Thelpusa a temple of Æsculapius, and a temple of the twelve
gods mostly in ruins. And after passing Thelpusa the Ladon flows on to
the temple of Demeter at Onceum: and the people of Thelpusa call the
goddess Erinys, as Antimachus also in his description of the expedition
of the Argives to Thebes, in the line,

 “Where they say was the seat of Demeter Erinys.”

Oncius was the son of Apollo according to tradition, and reigned in
Thelpusa at the place called Onceum. And the goddess Demeter got the
name Erinys in this way: when she was wandering about in quest of
her daughter Proserpine, Poseidon they say followed her with amatory
intentions, and she changed herself into a mare and grazed with the
other horses at Onceum, and Poseidon found out her metamorphosis and
changed himself into a horse and so got his ends, and Demeter was
furious at this outrage, but afterwards they say ceased from her anger
and bathed in the river Ladon. So the goddess got two surnames, Erinys
(_Fury_) from her furious anger, for the Arcadians call being angry
being a Fury, and Lusia from her bathing in the Ladon. The statues
in the temple are of wood, but the heads and fingers and toes are of
Parian marble. The statue of Erinys has in her left hand a cist and in
her right a torch, and is one conjectures about nine feet in height,
while the statue of Lusia seems six feet high. Let those who think
the statue is Themis, and not Demeter Lusia, know that their idea is
foolish. And they say that Demeter bare a daughter to Poseidon, (whose
name they will not reveal to the uninitiated), and the foal Arion, and
that was why Poseidon was called Hippius there first in Arcadia. And
they introduce some lines from the Iliad and Thebaid in confirmation of
this: in the Iliad the lines about Arion.

“Not if one were to drive from behind the godlike Arion, swift courser
of Adrastus, who was of the race of the Immortals.”[32] And in the
Thebaid when Adrastus fled from Thebes, “Dressed in sad-coloured
clothes with Arion dark-maned courser.”

They want to make the lines indicate in an ambiguous way that Poseidon
was the father of Arion. But Antimachus says he was the son of earth:

“Adrastus, the son of Talaus and grandson of Cretheus, was the first of
the Danai who drove a pair of much praised horses, the swift Cærus and
Thelpusian Arion, whom near the grove of Oncean Apollo the earth itself
gave birth to, a wonder for mortals to look upon.”

And though this horse sprung out of the ground it may have been of
divine origin, and its mane and colour may have been dark. For there is
a tradition that Hercules when he was warring with the people of Elis
asked Oncus for a horse, and captured Elis riding into the battle upon
Arion, and that afterwards he gave the horse to Adrastus. Antimachus
also has written about Arion, “He was broken in thirdly by king
Adrastus.”

The river Ladon next leaves in its course on its left the temple of
Erinys as also the temple of Oncean Apollo, and on its right the temple
of the Boy Æsculapius, which also contains the tomb of Trygon, who they
say was the nurse of Æsculapius. For Æsculapius as a boy was exposed at
Thelpusa, and found by Autolaus the bastard son of Arcas and brought
up by him, and that is I think the reason why a temple was erected to
the Boy Æsculapius, as I have set forth in my account of Epidaurus.
And there is a river called Tuthoa, which flows into the Ladon near
the boundary between the districts of Thelpusa and Heræa called by the
Arcadians Plain. And where the Ladon flows into the Alpheus is what
is called the Island of Crows. Some think that Enispe and Stratie and
Rhipe mentioned by Homer were islands formed by the Ladon and formerly
inhabited, but let them know the idea is a foolish one, for the Ladon
could never form islands such as a boat could pass. For though in
beauty it is second to no Greek or barbarian river, it is not wide
enough to make islands as the Ister or Eridanus.

[32] Iliad, xxiii. 346, 7.




CHAPTER XXVI.


The founder of Heræa was Heræus the son of Lycaon, and the town lies on
the right of the Alpheus, most of it on a gentle eminence, but part of
it extending to the river. Near the river are race-courses separated
from each other by myrtle trees and other planted trees, and there are
baths, and two temples of Dionysus, one called Polites, and the other
Auxites. And they have a building where they celebrate the orgies of
Dionysus. There is also at Heræa a temple of Pan, who was a native of
Arcadia. And there are some ruins of a temple of Hera, of which the
pillars still remain. And of all the Arcadian athletes Damaretus of
Heræa was the foremost, and the first who conquered at Olympia in the
race in heavy armour. And as you go from Heræa to Elis, you will cross
the Ladon about 15 stades from Heræa, and from thence to Erymanthus is
about 20 stades. And the boundary between Heræa and Elis is according
to the Arcadian account the Erymanthus, but the people of Elis say
that the boundary is the tomb of Corœbus, who was victor when Iphitus
restored the Olympian games that had been for a long time discontinued,
and offered prizes only for racing. And there is an inscription on his
tomb that he was the first victor at Olympia, and that his tomb was
erected on the borders of Elis.

There is a small town also called Aliphera, which was abandoned by
many of its inhabitants at the time the Arcadian colony was formed at
Megalopolis. To get to Aliphera from Heræa you cross the Alpheus, and
when you have gone along the plain about 10 stades you arrive at a
mountain, and about 30 stades further you will get to Aliphera over the
mountain. The town got its name from Alipherus the son of Lycaon, and
has temples of Æsculapius and Athene. The latter they worship most, and
say that she was born and reared among them; they have also built an
altar here to Zeus Lecheates, so called because he gave birth to Athene
here. And they call their fountain Tritonis, adopting as their own the
tradition about the river Triton. And there is a statue of Athene in
bronze, the work of Hypatodorus, notable both for its size and artistic
merit. They have also a public festival to one of the gods, who I think
must be Athene. In this public festival they sacrifice first of all to
Muiagrus (_Flycatcher_), and offer to him vows and call upon him, and
when they have done this they think they will no longer be troubled
by flies. And on the road from Heræa to Megalopolis is Melæneæ, which
was founded by Melæneus the son of Lycaon, but is deserted in our day,
being swamped with water. And 40 stades higher is Buphagium, where the
river Buphagus rises, which falls into the Alpheus. And the sources of
the Buphagus are the boundary between the districts of Megalopolis and
Heræa.




CHAPTER XXVII.


Megalopolis is the most recent city not only in Arcadia but in all
Greece, except those which have been filled by settlers from Rome in
the changes made by the Roman Empire. And the Arcadians crowded into
it to swell its strength, remembering that the Argives in older days
had run almost daily risk of being reduced in war by the Lacedæmonians,
but when they had made Argos strong by an influx of population then
they were able to reduce Tiryns, and Hysiæ, and Orneæ, and Mycenæ, and
Midea, and other small towns of no great importance in Argolis, and had
not only less fear of the Lacedæmonians but were stronger as regards
their neighbours generally. Such was the idea which made the Arcadians
crowd into Megalopolis. The founder of the city might justly be called
Epaminondas the Theban: for he it was that stirred up the Arcadians
to this colonization, and sent 1,000 picked Thebans, with Parmenes as
their leader, to defend the Arcadians should the Lacedæmonians attempt
to prevent the colonization. And the Arcadians chose as founders of the
colony Lycomedes and Opoleas from Mantinea, and Timon and Proxenus
from Tegea, and Cleolaus and Acriphius from Clitor, and Eucampidas
and Hieronymus from Mænalus, and Possicrates and Theoxenus from
Parrhasium. And the towns which were persuaded by the Arcadians (out
of liking for them and hatred to the Lacedæmonians) to leave their own
native places were Alea, Pallantium, Eutæa, Sumateum, Iasæa, Peræthes,
Helisson, Oresthasium, Dipæa, Lycæa, all these from Mænalus. And of
the Entresii Tricoloni, and Zœtium, and Charisia, and Ptolederma,
and Cnausus, and Parorea. And of the Ægytæ Scirtonium, and Malæa,
and Cromi, and Blenina, and Leuctrum. And of the Parrhasii Lycosura,
and Thocnia, and Trapezus, and Proses, and Acacesium, and Acontium,
and Macaria, and Dasea. And of the Cynuræans in Arcadia Gortys, and
Thisoa near Mount Lycæus, and Lycæatæ, and Aliphera. And of those which
were ranked with Orchomenus Thisoa, and Methydrium, and Teuthis, and
moreover the town called Tripolis, and Dipœna, and Nonacris. And the
rest of Arcadia fell in with the general plan, and zealously gathered
into Megalopolis. The people of Lycæatæ and Tricolonus and Lycosura
and Trapezus were the only Arcadians that changed their minds, and,
as they did not agree to leave their old cities, some of them were
forced into Megalopolis against their will, and the people of Trapezus
evacuated the Peloponnese altogether, all that is that were not killed
by the Arcadians in their fierce anger, and those that got away safe
sailed to Pontus, and were received as colonists by those who dwelt
at Trapezus on the Euxine, seeing that they came from the mother-city
and bare the same name. But the people of Lycosura though they had
refused compliance yet, as they had fled for refuge to their temple,
were spared from awe of Demeter and Proserpine. And of the other towns
which I have mentioned some are altogether without inhabitants in our
day, and others are villages under Megalopolis, as Gortys, Dipœna,
Thisoa near Orchomenus, Methydrium, Teuthis, Calliæ, and Helisson. And
Pallantium was the only town in that day that seemed to find the deity
mild. But Aliphera has continued a town from of old up to this day.

Megalopolis was colonized a year and a few months after the reverse
of the Lacedæmonians at Leuctra, when Phrasiclides was Archon at
Athens, in the second year of the 102nd Olympiad, when Damon of
Thuria was victor in the course. And the people of Megalopolis, after
being enrolled in alliance with Thebes, had nothing to fear from the
Lacedæmonians. So they thought. But when the Thebans commenced what is
called the Sacred War and the people of Phocis attacked them, who were
on the borders of Bœotia, and had plenty of money as they had seized
on the temple stores at Delphi, then the Lacedæmonians in their zeal
tried to drive out the people of Megalopolis and the other Arcadians,
but as they stoutly defended themselves, and were openly assisted by
their neighbours, nothing very remarkable happened on either side.
But the hostility between the Arcadians and the Lacedæmonians tended
to increase greatly the power of the Macedonians and Philip the son
of Amyntas, as neither at Chæronea nor again in Thessaly did the
Arcadians fight on the side of the Greeks. And no long time after
Aristodemus seized the chief power in Megalopolis. He was a Phigalian
by race and the son of Artylas, but had been adopted by Tritæus, one
of the leading men in Megalopolis. This Aristodemus, in spite of his
seizing the chief power, was yet called Good man and True. For when he
was in power the Lacedæmonians marched with an army into the district
of Megalopolis under Acrotatus, the eldest of the sons of their king
Cleomenes--I have already given his genealogy and that of all the
kings of Sparta--and in a fierce battle that ensued, in which many
were slain on both sides, the men of Megalopolis were victorious, and
among the Spartans who fell was Acrotatus, who thus lost his chance of
succession. And two generations after the death of Aristodemus Lydiades
seized the chief power: he was of no obscure family, and by nature very
ambitious, (as he showed himself afterwards), and yet a patriot. For he
was very young when he had the chief power, and when he came to years
of discretion he voluntarily abdicated his power, though it was quite
firmly established. And, when the people of Megalopolis joined the
Achæan League, Lydiades was held in such high honour, both by his own
city and by all the Achæans, that his fame was equal to that of Aratus.
And again the Lacedæmonians in full force under the king of the other
family, Agis the son of Eudamidas, marched against Megalopolis, with a
larger and better-equipped army than that which Acrotatus had gathered
together, and defeated the people of Megalopolis who came out to meet
them, and bringing a mighty battering-ram against the walls gave the
tower a strong shake, and the next day hoped to batter it down all
together. But the North Wind was it seems destined to be a benefactor
to all the Greeks, for it shattered most of the Persian ships at the
rocks called Sepiades,[33] and the same Wind prevented the capture of
Megalopolis, for it broke in pieces Agis’ battering-ram by a strong
continuous and irresistible blast. This Agis, whom the North Wind thus
prevented taking Megalopolis, is the same who was driven out of Pellene
in Achaia by the Sicyonians under Aratus[34] and who afterwards died
at Mantinea. And no long time afterwards Cleomenes the son of Leonidas
took Megalopolis in time of peace. And some of the inhabitants bravely
defending their city in the night were driven out, and Lydiades fell in
the action fighting in a manner worthy of his renown: and Philopœmen
the son of Craugis saved about two-thirds of the lads and grown
men, and fled with the women to Messenia. And Cleomenes slew all he
captured, and rased the city to the ground, and burnt it with fire. How
the people of Megalopolis recovered their city, and what they did after
their restoration to it, I shall narrate when I come to Philopœmen. And
the Lacedæmonian nation had no share in the sufferings of the people of
Megalopolis, for Cleomenes had changed the constitution from a kingdom
to an autocracy.

As I have before said, the boundary between the districts of
Megalopolis and Heræa is the source of the river Buphagus, named they
say after the hero Buphagus, the son of Iapetus and Thornax. There is
also a Thornax in Laconia. And they have a tradition that Artemis slew
Buphagus with an arrow at the mountain Pholoe because he attempted her
chastity.

[33] See Herodotus vii. 188, 189.

[34] See Book vii. ch. 7.




CHAPTER XXVIII.


And as you go from the sources of the Buphagus you will first come to
a place called Maratha, and next to Gortys, a village in our day but
formerly a town. There is there a temple of Æsculapius in Pentelican
marble, his statue has no beard, there is also a statue of Hygiea, both
statues are by Scopas. And the people of the place say that Alexander
the son of Philip offered his breastplate and spear to Æsculapius, in
my day the breastplate was still to be seen and the tip of the spear.

Gortys has a river called Lusius flowing by it, so called in the
neighbourhood from the tradition of Zeus being washed there after his
birth. But those who live at some distance call the river Gortynius
from the name of the village Gortys. This Gortynius is one of the
coldest of streams. The Ister, the Rhine, the Hypanis, the Borysthenes,
and other rivers that are congealed in winter, one might rightly call
in my opinion winter rivers: for they flow through country mostly lying
in snow, and the air in their neighbourhood is generally frosty. But
those rivers which flow in a temperate climate, and refresh men in
summer both in drinking and bathing, and in winter are not unpleasant,
these are the rivers which I should say furnish cold water. Cold is the
water of Cydnus that flows through the district of Tarsus, cold is the
water of Melas by Side in Pamphylia: while the coldness of the river
Ales near Colophon has been celebrated by elegiac poets. But Gortynius
is colder still especially in summer. It has its sources at Thisoa on
the borders of Methydrium, the place where it joins the Alpheus they
call Rhæteæ.

Near the district of Thisoa is a village called Teuthis, formerly a
town. In the war against Ilium it furnished a leader whose name was
Teuthis, or according to others Ornytus. But when the winds were
unfavourable to the Greeks at Aulis, and a contrary wind detained them
there some time, Teuthis had some quarrel with Agamemnon, and was going
to march back with his detachment of Arcadians. Then they say Athene
in the semblance of Melas the son of Ops tried to divert Teuthis from
his homeward march. But he in his boiling rage ran his spear into the
goddess’ thigh, and marched his army back from Aulis. And when he got
back home he thought the goddess shewed him her wounded thigh. And
from that time a wasting disease seized on Teuthis, and that was the
only part of Arcadia where the land produced no fruit. And some time
after several oracular responses were given from Dodona, shewing them
how to propitiate the goddess, and they made a statue of Athene with a
wound in her thigh. I have seen this statue with the thigh bound with
a purple bandage. In Teuthis there are also temples of Aphrodite and
Artemis. So much for Teuthis.

On the road from Gortys to Megalopolis is erected a monument to those
who fell in the battle against Cleomenes. This monument the people of
Megalopolis call the Treaty Violation, because Cleomenes violated the
treaty. Near this monument is a plain 60 stades in extent, and on the
right are the ruins of the town of Brenthe, and the river Brentheates
flows from thence, and joins the Alpheus about 5 stades further.




CHAPTER XXIX.


After crossing the Alpheus you come to the district of Trapezus, and
the ruins of the town of Trapezus, and again as you turn to the Alpheus
on the left from Trapezus is a place not far from the river called
Bathos, where every third year they have rites to the Great Goddesses.
And there is a spring there called Olympias, which flows only every
other year, and near it fire comes out of the ground. And the Arcadians
say that the fabled battle between the giants and the gods took place
here, and not at Pallene in Thrace, and they sacrifice here to thunder
and lightning and storms. In the Iliad Homer has not mentioned the
Giants, but in the Odyssey[35] he has stated that the Læstrygones who
attacked the ships of Odysseus were like giants and not men, he has
also represented the king of the Phæacians saying that the Phæacians
are near the gods as the Cyclopes and the race of giants.[36] But in
the following lines he shews very clearly that the giants are mortal
and not a divine race:

    “Who ruled once o’er the overweening Giants:
    But that proud race destroyed, and died himself.”[37]

The word used for race (λαὸς) here in Homer means a good many.
The fable that the giants had dragons instead of feet is shewn both
here and elsewhere to be merely a fable. Orontes a river in Syria,
(which does not flow to the sea throughout through a level plain, but
pours down along precipitous rocks), the Roman Emperor wanted to make
navigable for ships from the sea as far as Antioch. So with great
labour and expenditure of money he dug a canal fit for this purpose,
and diverted the river into it. And when the old channel was dry, an
earthenware coffin was discovered in it more than 11 cubits in length,
and that was the size of the corpse in it which was a perfect man. This
corpse the god in Clarus, when some Syrians consulted the oracle, said
was Orontes of Indian race. And if the earth which was originally moist
and damp first produced mortals by the warmth of the sun, what part of
the world is likely to have produced mortals either earlier or bigger
than India, which even up to our day produces beasts excelling ours
both in strange appearance and in size?

And about 10 stades from the place called Bathos is Basilis, whose
founder was Cypselus, who married his daughter to Cresphontes the son
of Aristomachus. Basilis is now in ruins, and there are remains of
a temple to Eleusinian Demeter. As you go on from thence and cross
the Alpheus again you will come to Thocnia, which gets its name from
Thocnus the son of Lycaon, and is quite deserted in our day. Thocnus is
said to have built his town on the hill. And the river Aminius flows
past this hill and falls into the Helisson, and at no great distance
the Helisson flows into the Alpheus.

[35] Odyssey, x. 119, 120.

[36] Odyssey, vii. 205, 206.

[37] Id. vii. 59, 60.




CHAPTER XXX.


The river Helisson rises in a village of the same name, and flows
through the districts of Dipæa and Lycæatæ and Megalopolis, and falls
into the Alpheus about 30 stades from Megalopolis. And near the city is
a temple of Watching Poseidon, the head of the statue is all that now
remains.

The river Helisson divides Megalopolis into two parts, as Cnidos and
Mitylene are divided by their channels, and the market-place is built
in a northerly direction, on the right of the river’s course. There are
precincts and a stone temple to Lycæan Zeus. But there is no approach
to it, for the inside is visible, there are altars to the god and two
tables and as many eagles. And there is a stone statue of Pan, surnamed
Œnois from the Nymph Œnoe, who used to be with the other Nymphs, and
was privately Pan’s nurse. And in front of the sacred precincts is
a brazen statue of Apollo, very fine, about 12 feet high, it was a
contribution from Phigalia towards the beautifying of Megalopolis. And
the place where the statue was originally put by the people of Phigalia
was called Bassæ. Epicurius, the title of the god, accompanied the
statue from Phigalia, the origin of that title I shall explain when I
come to Phigalia. And on the right of the statue of Apollo is a small
statue of the Mother of the Gods, but no remains of the temple except
the pillars. In front of the temple is no statue of the Mother, but
the bases on which statues are put are visible. And an elegiac couplet
on one of the bases says that the effigy there was Diophanes the son
of Diæus, who first ranged all the Peloponnese into what is called the
Achæan League. And the portico in the market-place called Philip’s was
not erected by Philip the son of Amyntas, but the people of Megalopolis
to gratify him named it after him. And a temple was built close to it
to Hermes Acacesius, of which nothing now remains but a stone tortoise.
And near Philip’s portico is another not so large, which contains six
public offices for the magistrates of Megalopolis: in one of them is a
statue of Ephesian Artemis, and in another a brazen Pan a cubit high
surnamed Scolitas. Pan got this title from the hill Scolitas, which is
inside the walls, and from which water flows into the Helisson from a
spring. And behind these public offices is a temple of Fortune, and a
stone statue five feet high. And the portico which they call Myropolis
is in the market-place, it was built out of the spoils taken from the
Lacedæmonians under Acrotatus the son of Cleomenes, who were defeated
fighting against Aristodemus, who at that time had the chief power in
Megalopolis. And in the market-place behind the precincts sacred to
Lycæan Zeus is the statue on a pillar of Polybius the son of Lycortas.
Some elegiac verses are inscribed stating that he travelled over every
land and sea, and was an ally of the Romans and appeased their wrath
against Greece. This was the Polybius that wrote the history of Rome,
and the origin and history of the Carthaginian war, and how at last
not without a mighty struggle Scipio, whom they called Africanus, put
an end to the war and rased Carthage to the ground. And when the Roman
General followed the advice that Polybius gave, things went well, when
he did not he met they say with misfortune. And all the Greek cities
that joined the Achæan League got the Romans to allow Polybius to fix
their constitution and frame their laws. And the council chamber is on
the left of Polybius’ statue.

And the portico in the market-place called Aristandreum was they say
built by Aristander, one of the citizens. Very near this portico
towards the east is the temple of Zeus Soter, adorned with pillars all
round. Zeus is represented seated on his throne, and by him stands
Megalopolis, and on the left is a statue of Artemis Preserver. All
these are in Pentelican marble, and were carved by the Athenians
Cephisodotus and Xenophon.




CHAPTER XXXI.


And the west end of the portico has precincts sacred to the Great
Goddesses. They are Demeter and Proserpine, as I have already set forth
in my account of Messenia, and Proserpine is called by the Arcadians
Preserver. And on figures in relief at the entrance are Artemis,
Æsculapius, and Hygiea. And of the Great Goddesses Demeter is in stone
throughout, Proserpine has the parts under her dress of wood, the
height of both statues is about 15 feet. The statues in front of 2
moderate-sized maidens, in tunics that come down to their ankles, are
they say the daughters of Damophon, each of them has a basket on her
head full of flowers. But those who think they are divinities take
them to be Athene and Artemis gathering flowers with Proserpine. There
is also a Hercules by Demeter about a cubit high, Onomacritus in his
verses says that this Hercules was one of the Idæan Dactyli. There is a
table in front of him, and on it are carved two Seasons, and Pan with
his reed-pipe, and Apollo with his lyre. There is also an inscription
stating that they were among the earliest gods. On the table are also
carved the following Nymphs, Neda carrying Zeus while still a baby, and
Anthracia one of the Arcadian Nymphs with a torch, and Hagno with a
water-pot in one hand and in the other a bowl, Archirhoe and Myrtoessa
also are carrying water-pots and water is trickling from them. And
inside the precincts is the temple of Friendly Zeus, the statue is like
Dionysus and is by the Argive Polycletus. The god has buskins on, and
a cup in one hand, and in the other a thyrsus, and an eagle perched
on the thyrsus. This last is the only thing which does not harmonize
with the legendary Dionysus. And behind this temple is a small grove of
trees surrounded by a wall, into which men may not enter. And before
it are statues of Demeter and Proserpine about 3 feet high. And inside
the precincts is a temple of the Great Goddesses and of Aphrodite.
Before the entrance are some old wooden statues of Hera and Apollo and
the Muses, brought they say from Trapezus. The statues in the temple
were made by Damophon, Hermes’ in wood, and Aphrodite’s in wood, except
her hands and head and toes, which are of stone. And they surname the
Goddess Inventive, most properly in my opinion, for most inventions
come from Aphrodite whether in word or deed. There are also in a room
some statues of Callignotus and Mentas and Sosigenes and Polus, who
are said to have first instituted at Megalopolis the worship of the
Great Goddesses, which is an imitation of the Eleusinian Mysteries.
And within the precincts are square figures of several gods, as Hermes
surnamed Agetor, and Apollo, and Athene, and Poseidon, and the Sun
surnamed Soter, and Hercules. A large temple has been built to them, in
which are celebrated the rites of the Great Goddesses.

And on the right of the temple of the Great Goddesses is the temple
of Proserpine; her statue is of stone about 8 feet high, and there
are fillets on the base throughout. Into this temple women have at
all times right of entrance, but men only once a year. And there is a
gymnasium in the market-place built facing west. And behind the portico
which they call after Macedonian Philip are two hills not very high;
and on one are ruins of a temple of Athene Polias, and on the other
ruins of a temple of full-grown Hera. Under this hill the spring called
Bathyllus swells the stream of the river Helisson. Such are the things
worthy of mention here.




CHAPTER XXXII.


The part of the city on the other side of the river faces south, and
has one of the most remarkable theatres in Greece, and in it is a
perennial spring. And not far from the theatre are the foundations of a
council-chamber, which was built for 10,000 Arcadians, and called from
its builder Thersilium. And next is a house which in my time belonged
to a private man, but was originally built for Alexander the son of
Philip. And there is a statue of Ammon near it, like the square Hermæ,
with ram’s horns on its head. And there is a temple built in common
for the Muses and Apollo and Hermes, of which a few foundations only
remain. There are also statues of one of the Muses, and of Apollo,
like the square Hermæ. There are also ruins of a temple of Aphrodite,
of which nothing remains but the vestibule and three statues of the
goddess, one called the Celestial, the second the Common, the third
has no title. And at no great distance is an altar of Ares, who had
also it is said a temple there originally. There is also a racecourse
beyond the temple of Aphrodite, in one direction extending towards the
theatre, (and there is a spring of water there which they hold sacred
to Dionysus,) and in another part of it there was said to be a temple
of Dionysus, struck with lightning by the god two generations before
my time, and there are still a few vestiges of it. But a joint-temple
to Hercules and Hermes is no longer in existence, except the Altar.
And in this direction there is a hill towards the east, and on it a
temple of the Huntress Artemis, the votive offering of Aristodemus,
and on the right are precincts sacred to the Huntress Artemis. Here
too are a temple and statues of Æsculapius and Hygiea, and as you
descend a little there are gods in a square shape called Workers, as
Athene Ergane and Apollo Agyieus. And Hermes, Hercules, and Ilithyia,
have special fame from Homer, for Hermes is the messenger of Zeus and
conveys the souls of the departed to Hades, and Hercules is famous for
the accomplishment of his many Labours, and Ilithyia is represented in
the Iliad as presiding over childbirth. There is also another temple
under this hill, of Æsculapius as a Boy, the statue of the god is erect
and about a cubit in height, and there is also an Apollo seated on a
throne about six feet high. There are here also stored up some bones
too large to belong to a man, they are said to have belonged to one of
the giants, whom Hopladamus called in to aid Rhea, the circumstances
I shall narrate later on. And near this temple is a well, which
contributes its water to the Helisson.




CHAPTER XXXIII.


That Megalopolis, peopled with such zeal on the part of all the
Arcadians and with the best wishes from all Greece, has lost all its
ancient prestige and felicity and is in our day mostly ruins, I nothing
marvel at, knowing that the deity ever likes to introduce changes, and
that fortune in like manner changes things strong and weak, present
and past, reducing with a high hand everything in subjection to her.
Witness Mycenæ, which in the days of the war against Ilium was the
leading power in Greece, and Nineveh the seat of the Assyrian empire,
and Thebes in Bœotia, which was once reckoned worthy to be at the
head of Greece: the two former are in ruins and without inhabitants,
while the name of Thebes has come down to a citadel only and a few
inhabitants. And of the cities which were excessively wealthy of old,
as Thebes in Egypt, and Orchomenus belonging to the Minyæ, and Delos
the emporium of all Greece, the two former are hardly as wealthy as a
man moderately well off, while Delos is actually without a population
at all, if you do not reckon the Athenians who come to guard the
temple. And of Babylon nothing remains but the temple of Bel and the
walls, though it was the greatest city once that the sun shone upon, as
nothing but its walls remain to Tiryns in Argolis. All these the deity
has reduced to nothing. Whereas Alexandria in Egypt and Seleucia on
the Orontes, that were built only yesterday, have attained to such a
size and felicity, that fortune seems to lavish her favours upon them.
Fortune also exhibits her power more mightily and wonderfully than in
the good or bad fortune of cities in the following cases. No long sail
from Lemnos is the island Chryse, in which they say Philoctetes met
with his bite from the watersnake. This island was entirely submerged
by the waves, so that it went to the bottom of the sea. And another
island called Hiera, which did not then exist, has been formed by the
action of the sea. So fleeting and unstable are human affairs!




CHAPTER XXXIV.


As you go from Megalopolis to Messene, you will come in about 7 stades
to a temple of some goddesses on the left of the high road. They
call both goddesses and place Maniæ, which is I fancy a title of the
Eumenides, for they say Orestes was driven mad here after the murder
of his mother. And not far from the temple is a small mound, with a
stone finger upon it, the mound is called Finger’s tomb, because here
they say Orestes in his madness gnawed off one of his fingers. And
there is another place contiguous called Ace, because there Orestes
was healed of his madness: there too is a temple to the Eumenides.
These goddesses, they say, when they wanted to drive Orestes mad,
appeared black to him, and when he had gnawed off his finger then they
appeared white, and this sight made him sane, and he turned away their
wrath by offering to them expiations, and he sacrificed to these white
goddesses; they usually sacrifice to them and the Graces together. And
near the place Ace is a temple called Shearing-place, because Orestes
cut off his hair inside it. And the Antiquarians of the Peloponnese say
that this pursuit of Orestes by the Furies of his mother Clytæmnestra
happened prior to the trial before the Areopagus, when his accuser was
not Tyndareus, for he was no longer alive, but Perilaus the cousin of
Clytæmnestra, who asked for vengeance for the murder of his kinswoman.
Perilaus was the son of Icarius, who afterwards had daughters born to
him.

From Maniæ to the Alpheus is about 15 stades, to the place where the
river Gatheatas flows into the Alpheus, as earlier still the river
Carnion falls into the Gatheatas. The sources of the Carnion are at
Ægytis below the temple of Apollo Cereates; and the Gatheatas has its
rise at Gatheæ in the Cromitic district, which is about 40 stades
from the Alpheus, and in it the ruins can still be traced of the
town of Cromi. From Cromi it is about 20 stades to Nymphas, which
is well watered and full of trees. And from Nymphas it is about 20
stades to Hermæum, the boundary between the districts of Messenia and
Megalopolis, where there is a Hermes on a pillar.




CHAPTER XXXV.


This road leads to Messene, but another leads from Megalopolis to
Carnasium in Messenia, where the Alpheus has its rise, at the place
where the Malus and the Scyrus mingle their waters with it in one
stream. If you keep the Malus on the right for about thirty stades and
then cross it, you will mount on higher ground till you come to the
place called Phædria, which is about 15 stades from the village called
Hermæum, near the temple of Despœna. Hermæum is the boundary between
the districts of Messenia and Megalopolis, and there are statues not
very large of Despœna and Demeter, Hermes and Hercules: and I think the
wooden statue of Hercules made by Dædalus on the borders of Messenia
and Arcadia once stood here.

The road to Lacedæmon from Megalopolis is 30 stades to the Alpheus, and
then along the riverside till you come to one of its tributaries the
Thius, which you leave on the left and arrive at Phalæsiæ, about 40
stades from the Alpheus. Phalæsiæ is about 20 stades from the temple of
Hermes at Belemina. The Arcadians say that Belemina originally belonged
to them, and that the Lacedæmonians robbed them of it. But their
account is not probable on other grounds, nor is at all likely that
the Thebans would have allowed the Arcadians to be stripped of their
territory in this quarter, could they with justice have righted them.

From Megalopolis are also roads to the interior of Arcadia, as to
Methydrium 170 stades from Megalopolis, and 13 stades further to the
place called Scias, where are ruins of a temple to Sciadian Artemis,
erected tradition says by Aristodemus the tyrant. And 10 stades
further there are the ruins of a place called Charisiæ, and another
10 stades further is Tricoloni, which was formerly a town; and there
is still on the hill a temple and square statue of Poseidon, and a
grove of trees round the temple. Tricoloni was founded by the sons of
Lycaon, and Zœtia about 15 stades from Tricoloni, (not in a direct
line but a little to the left); was founded they say by Zœteus the
son of Tricolonus. And Paroreus, the younger son of Tricolonus,
founded Paroria, which is about 10 stades from Zœtia. Both are without
inhabitants now, but at Zœtia there are temples of Demeter and Artemis.
And there are other towns in ruins, as Thyræum 15 stades from Paroria,
and Hypsus on a hill of the same name above the plain. Between Thyræum
and Hypsus all the country is hilly and abounds with wild beasts. I
have previously shewn that Thyræus and Hypsus were sons of Lycaon.

On the right of Tricoloni is a steep road to a spring called Wells,
as you descend about 30 stades you come to the tomb of Callisto, a
high mound of earth, with many trees growing wild, and some planted.
And on the top of this mound is a temple of Artemis called The Most
Beautiful, and I think when Pamphus in his verses called Artemis The
Most Beautiful he first learnt this epithet from the Arcadians. And
twenty-five stades further, 100 from Tricolonus in the direction of the
Helisson, on the high road to Methydrium, (which is the only town left
to Tricoloni), is a place called Anemosa and the mountain Phalanthum,
on which are ruins of a town of the same name, founded they say by
Phalanthus, the son of Agelaus, and grandson of Stymphelus. Above it
is a plain called Polus, and next to it is Schœnus, so called from the
Bœotian Schœneus. And if Schœneus was a stranger in Arcadia, Atalanta’s
Course near Schœnus may have taken its name from his daughter. And next
is a place called I think * * *, and all agree that this is Arcadian
soil.




CHAPTER XXXVI.


Nothing now remains to be mentioned but Methydrium, which is 137 stades
from Tricoloni. It was called Methydrium, because the high hill on
which Orchomenus built the town was between the rivers Malœtas and
Mylaon, and, before it was included in Megalopolis, inhabitants of
Methydrium were victors at Olympia. There is at Methydrium a temple
of Poseidon Hippius near the river Mylaon. And the mountain called
Thaumasium lies above the river Malœtas, and the people of Methydrium
wish it to be believed that Rhea when she was pregnant with Zeus came
to this mountain, and got the protection of Hoplodamus and the other
Giants with him, in case Cronos should attack her. They admit that
Rhea bore Zeus on part of Mt Lycæeus, but they say that the cheating
of Cronos and the offering him a stone instead of the child, (a legend
universal amongst the Greeks), took place here. And on the top of the
mountain is Rhea’s Cave, and into it only women sacred to the goddess
may enter, nobody else.

About 30 stades from Methydrium is the well Nymphasia, and about
30 stades from Nymphasia is the joint boundary for the districts of
Megalopolis Orchomenus and Caphya.

From Megalopolis, through what are called the gates to the marsh, is a
way to Mænalus by the river Helisson. And on the left of the road is a
temple of the Good God. And if the gods are the givers of good things
to mortals, and Zeus is the chief of the gods, one would follow the
tradition and conjecture that this is a title of Zeus. A little further
is a mound of earth, the tomb of Aristodemus, who though a tyrant
was not robbed of the title of Good, and a temple of Athene called
Inventive, because she is a goddess who invents various contrivances.
And on the right of the road is an enclosure sacred to the North Wind,
to whom the people of Megalopolis sacrifice annually, and they hold no
god in higher honour than Boreas, as he was their preserver from Agis
and the Lacedæmonians.[38] And next is the tomb of Œcles the father
of Amphiaraus, if indeed death seized him in Arcadia, and not when he
was associated with Hercules in the expedition against Laomedon. Next
to it is a temple and grove of Demeter called Demeter of the Marsh,
five stades from the city, into which none but women may enter. And
thirty stades further is the place called Paliscius. About 20 stades
from Paliscius, leaving on the left the river Elaphus which is only a
winter torrent, are the ruins of Peræthes and a temple of Pan. And if
you cross the winter-torrent, about 15 stades from the river is a plain
called Mænalium, and after having traversed this you come to a mountain
of the same name. At the bottom of this mountain are traces of the
town of Lycoa, and a temple and brazen statue of Artemis of Lycoa. And
in the southern part of the mountain is the town of Sumetia. In this
mountain are also the so-called Three Roads, whence the Mantineans,
according to the bidding of the oracle at Delphi, removed the remains
of Arcas the son of Callisto. There are also ruins of Mænalus, and
traces of a temple of Athene, and a course for athletical contests,
and another for horseraces. And the mountain Mænalium they consider
sacred to Pan, insomuch that those who live near it say that they hear
Pan making music with his pipes. Between the temple of Despœna and
Megalopolis it is 40 stades, half of the road by the Alpheus, and when
you have crossed it about 2 stades further are the ruins of Macaria,
and seven stades further are the ruins of Dasea, and it is as many more
from Dasea to the hill of Acacesius. Underneath this hill is the town
of Acacesium, and there is a statue of Hermes (made of the stone of the
hill) on the hill to this day, and they say Hermes was brought up there
as a boy, and there is a tradition among the Arcadians that Acacus the
son of Lycaon was his nurse. The Thebans have a different legend, and
the people of Tanagra again have a different one to the Theban one.

[38] See ch. 27.




CHAPTER XXXVII.


From Acacesium it is four stades to the temple of Despœna. There was
first there a temple of Artemis the Leader, and a brazen statue of the
goddess with torches, about 6 feet high I conjecture. From thence there
is an entrance to the sacred enclosure of Despœna. As you approach the
temple there is a portico on the right, and on the wall figures in
white stone, the Fates and Zeus as Master of the Fates, and Hercules
robbing Apollo of his tripod. All that I could discover about them I
will relate, when in my account of Phocis I come to Delphi. And in
the portico near the temple of Despœna, between the figures I have
mentioned, is a tablet painted with representations of the mysteries.
On a third figure are some Nymphs and Pans, and on a fourth Polybius
the son of Lycortas. And the inscription on him is that Greece would
not have been ruined at all had it taken his advice in all things, and
when it made mistakes he alone could have retrieved them. And in front
of the temple is an altar to Demeter and another to Despœna, and next
one to the Great Mother. And the statues of the Goddesses Despœna and
Demeter, and the throne on which they sit, and the footstool under
their feet, are all of one piece of stone: and neither about the dress
nor on the throne is any portion of another stone dove-tailed in, but
everything is one block of stone. This stone was not fetched from a
distance, they say, but, in consequence of a vision in a dream, found
and dug up in the temple precincts. And the size of each of the statues
is about the size of the statue at Athens of the Mother. They are by
Damophon. Demeter has a torch in her right hand, and has laid her left
hand upon Despœna: and Despœna has her sceptre, and on her knees what
is called a cist, which she has her right hand upon. And on one side of
the throne stands Artemis by Demeter, clad in the skin of a deer and
with her quiver on her shoulders, in one hand she holds a lamp, and in
the other two dragons. And at her feet lies a dog, such as are used
for hunting. And on the other side of the throne near Despœna stands
Anytus in armour: they say Despœna was brought up near the temple
by him. He was one of the Titans. Homer first introduced the Titans
into poetry, as gods in what is called Tartarus, in the lines about
the oath of Hera.[39] And Onomacritus borrowed the name of the Titans
from Homer when he wrote his poem about the orgies of Dionysus, and
represented the Titans as contributing to the sufferings of Dionysus.
Such is the Arcadian tradition about Anytus. It was Æschylus the son
of Euphorion that taught the Greeks the Egyptian legend, that Artemis
was the daughter of Demeter and not of Leto. As to the Curetes, for
they too are carved under the statues, and the Corybantes, a different
race from the Curetes who are carved on the base, though I know all
about them I purposely pass it by. And the Arcadians bring into the
temple all wood except that of the pomegranate. On the right hand as
you go out of the temple is a mirror fixed to the wall: if any one
looks into this mirror, he will see himself very obscurely or not at
all, but the statues of the goddesses and the throne he will see quite
clearly. And by the temple of Despœna as you ascend a little to the
right is the Hall, where the Arcadians perform her Mystic rites, and
sacrifice to her victims in abundance. Each sacrifices what animal
he has got: nor do they cut the throats of the victims as in other
sacrifices, but each cuts off whatever limb of the victim he lights on.
The Arcadians worship Despœna more than any of the gods, and say that
she was the daughter of Poseidon and Demeter. Her general appellation
is Despœna, a name they also give to the Daughter of Zeus and Demeter,
but her private name is Persephone, as Homer[40] and still earlier
Pamphus have given it, but that name of Despœna I feared to write down
for the uninitiated. And beyond the Hall is a grove sacred to Despœna
surrounded by a stone wall: in the grove are several kinds of trees, as
olives and oak from one root, which is something above the gardener’s
art. And beyond the grove are altars of Poseidon Hippius as the father
of Despœna, and of several other of the gods. And the inscription on
the last altar is that it is common to all the gods.

From thence you ascend by a staircase to the temple of Pan, which has a
portico and a not very large statue. To Pan as to all the most powerful
gods belongs the property of answering prayer and of punishing the
wicked. In his temple a never ceasing fire burns. It is said that in
ancient times Pan gave oracular responses, and that his interpreter was
the Nymph Erato, who married Arcas the son of Callisto. They also quote
some of Erato’s lines, which I have myself perused. There too is an
altar to Ares, and two statues of Aphrodite in a temple, one of white
marble, the more ancient one of wood. There are also wooden statues of
Apollo and Athene, Athene has also a temple.

[39] Iliad, xiv. 277-279.

[40] _e.g._ Odyssey, x. 491, 494, 509.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.


And a little higher up is the circuit of the walls of Lycosura, which
contains a few inhabitants. It is the oldest of the towns of the earth
either on the mainland or in islands, and the first the sun saw, and
all mankind made it their model for building towns.

And on the left of the temple of Despœna is Mount Lycæus, which some
of the Arcadians call Olympus and others the Sacred Hill. They say
Zeus was reared on this mountain: and there is a spot on it called
Cretea on the left of the grove of Parrhasian Apollo, and the Arcadians
maintain that this was the Crete where Zeus was reared, and not the
island of Crete as the Cretans hold. And the names of the Nymphs, by
whom they say Zeus was brought up, were (they say) Thisoa and Neda and
Hagno. Thisoa gave her name to a town in Parrhasia, and in my time
there is a village called Thisoa in the district of Megalopolis, and
Neda gave her name to the river Neda, and Hagno gave her name to the
spring on Mount Lycæus, which like the river Ister has generally as
much water in summer as in winter. But should a drought prevail for any
length of time, so as to be injurious to the fruits of the earth and to
trees, then the priest of Lycæan Zeus prays to the water and performs
the wonted sacrifice, and lowers a branch of oak into the spring just
on the surface, and when the water is stirred up a steam rises like
a mist, and after a little interval the mist becomes a cloud, and
collecting other clouds soon causes rain to fall upon Arcadia. There
is also on Mount Lycæus a temple of Pan and round it a grove of trees,
and a Hippodrome in front of it, where in old times they celebrated the
Lycæan games. There are also here the bases of some statues, though the
statues are no longer there: and an elegiac couplet on one of the bases
says it is the statue of Astyanax who was an Arcadian.

Mount Lycæus among other remarkable things has the following. There
is an enclosure sacred to Lycæan Zeus into which men may not enter,
and if any one violates this law he will not live more than a year. It
is also still stated that inside this enclosure men and beasts alike
have no shadow, and therefore when any beast flees into this enclosure
the hunter cannot follow it up, but remaining outside and looking at
the beast sees no shadow falling from it. As long indeed as the Sun
is in Cancer there is no shadow from trees or living things at Syene
in Ethiopia, but this sacred enclosure on Mount Lycæus is the same in
reference to shadows during every period of the year.

There is on the highest ridge of the mountain a mound of earth, the
altar of Lycæan Zeus, from which most of the Peloponnese is visible:
and in front of this altar there are two pillars facing east, and
some golden eagles upon them of very ancient date. On this altar they
sacrifice to Lycæan Zeus secretly: it would not be agreeable to me to
pry too curiously into the rites, let them be as they are and always
have been.

On the eastern part of the mountain is a temple of Parrhasian Apollo,
also called Pythian Apollo. During the annual festival of the god they
sacrifice in the market-place a boar to Apollo the Helper, and after
the sacrifice they convey the victim to the temple of Parrhasian Apollo
with fluteplaying and solemn procession, and cut off the thighs and
burn them, and consume the flesh of the victim on the spot. Such is
their annual custom.

And on the north side of Mount Lycæus is the district of Thisoa: the
men who live here hold the Nymph Thisoa in highest honour. Through this
district several streams flow that fall into the Alpheus, as Mylaon and
Nus and Achelous and Celadus and Naliphus. There are two other rivers
of the same name but far greater fame than this Achelous in Arcadia,
one that flows through Acarnania and Ætolia till it reaches the islands
of the Echinades, which Homer has called in the Iliad the king of all
rivers,[41] the other the Achelous flowing from Mount Sipylus, which
river and mountain he has associated with the legend of Niobe.[42] The
third Achelous is this one on Mount Lycæus.

To the right of Lycosura are the hills called Nomia, on which is a
temple of Pan Nomius on a spot called Melpea, so called they say from
the piping of Pan there. The simplest explanation why the hills were
called Nomia is that Pan had his pastures there, but the Arcadians say
they were called after a Nymph of that name.




CHAPTER XXXIX.


Past Lycosura in a westerly direction flows the river Plataniston,
which everyone must cross who is going to Phigalia, after which an
ascent of 30 stades or a little more takes you to that town. How
Phigalus was the son of Lycaon, and how he was the original founder of
the town, and how in process of time the name of the town got changed
into Phialia from Phialus the son of Bucolion, and afterwards got back
its old name, all this I have entered into already. There are other
traditions not worthy of credit, as that Phigalus was an Autochthon
and not the son of Lycaon, and some say that Phigalia was one of the
Nymphs called Dryads. When the Lacedæmonians attacked Arcadia and
invaded Phigalia, they defeated the inhabitants in a battle and laid
siege to the town, and as the town was nearly taken by storm the
Phigalians evacuated it, or the Lacedæmonians allowed them to leave it
upon conditions of war. And the capture of Phigalia and the flight of
the Phigalians from it took place when Miltiades was chief magistrate
at Athens, in the 2nd year of the 30th Olympiad, in which Chionis
the Laconian was victor for the third time. And it seemed good to
those Phigalians who had escaped to go to Delphi, and inquire of the
god as to their return. And the Pythian Priestess told them that if
they tried by themselves to return to Phigalia she foresaw no hope of
their return, but if they took a hundred picked men from Oresthasium,
and they were slain in battle, the Phigalians would get their return
through them. And when the people of Oresthasium heard of the oracular
message given to the Phigalians, they vied with one another in zeal who
should be one of the 100 picked men, and participate in the expedition
to Phigalia. And they engaged with the Lacedæmonian garrison and
fulfilled the oracle completely: for they all died fighting bravely,
and drove out the Spartans, and put it in the power of the Phigalians
to recover their native town. Phigalia lies on a hill which is mostly
precipitous, and its walls are built on the rocks, but as you go up to
the town there is a gentle and easy ascent. And there is a temple of
Artemis the Preserver, and her statue in stone in an erect position.
From this temple they usually conduct the processions. And in the
gymnasium there is a statue of Hermes with a cloak on, which does not
cease at his feet but covers the whole square figure. There is also a
temple of Dionysus called Acratophorus by the people of the place, the
lower parts of the statue are not visible being covered by leaves of
laurel and ivy. And all the statue that can be seen is coloured with
vermilion so as to look very gay. The Iberes find this vermilion with
their gold.

[41] Iliad, xxi. 194-197.

[42] Iliad, xxiv. 615-617.




CHAPTER XL.


The people of Phigalia have also in their market-place the statue of
Arrhachion the pancratiast, an antique one in all other respects and
not least so in its shape. The feet are not very wide apart, and the
hands are by the side near the buttocks. The statue is of stone, and
they say there was an inscription on it, which time has obliterated.
This Arrhachion had two victories at Olympia in the two Olympiads
before the 54th, through the equity of the umpires and his own merit.
For when he contended for the prize of wild olive with the only one
of his antagonists that remained, his opponent got hold of him first
and with his feet hugged him, and at the same time grappled his
neck tightly with his arms. And Arrhachion broke the finger of his
antagonist, and gave up the ghost being throttled, and his antagonist
also, though he had throttled Arrhachion, fainted away from the pain
his finger gave him. And the people of Elis crowned the dead body of
Arrhachion and proclaimed him victor. I know the Argives did the same
in the case of Creugas the boxer of Epidamnus, for though he was dead
they gave him the crown at Nemea, because his opponent Damoxenus the
Syracusan violated their mutual agreements. For as they were boxing
evening came on, and they agreed in the hearing of all the audience
that they should strike one another once in turn. Boxers did not at
this time wear the cestus loaded with iron, but they wore leather
thongs, (which they fastened under the hollow of the hand that the
fingers might be left uncovered), made of ox hides and thin and deftly
woven together after an old fashion. Then Creugas delivered the first
blow on Damoxenus’ head, and Damoxenus bade Creugas hold back his hand,
and as he did so struck him under the ribs with his fingers straight
out, and such was the hardness of his nails and the violence of the
blow that his hand pierced his side, seized his bowels and dragged
and tore them out. Creugas immediately expired. And the Argives drove
Damoxenus off the course because he had violated the conditions, and
instead of one blow had given several to his antagonist. To Creugas
though dead they assigned the victory, and erected to him a statue in
Argos, which is now in the temple of Lycian Apollo.




CHAPTER XLI.


The Phigalians have also in their market-place a mortuary chapel to the
100 picked men from Oresthasium, and annually offer funeral sacrifices
to them as to heroes. And the river called Lymax which falls into
the Neda flows by Phigalia. It got its name Lymax they say from the
purifications of Rhea. For when after giving birth to Zeus the Nymphs
purified her after travail, they threw into this river the afterbirth,
which the ancients called Lymata. Homer bears me out when he says that
the Greeks purifying themselves to get rid of the pestilence threw
the purifications into the sea.[43] The Neda rises on the mountain
Cerausius, which is a part of Mount Lycæus. And where the Neda is
nearest to Phigalia, there the lads of the town shear off their hair to
the river. And near the sea it is navigable for small craft. Of all the
rivers that we know of the Mæander is most winding having most curves
and sinuosities. And next for winding would come the Neda. About 12
stades from Phigalia are hot baths, and the Lymax flows into the Neda
not far from that place. And where they join their streams is a temple
of Eurynome, holy from remote antiquity, and difficult of access from
the roughness of the ground. Round it grow many cypresses close to
one another. Eurynome the Phigalian people believe to be a title of
Artemis, but their Antiquarians say that Eurynome was the daughter of
Oceanus, and is mentioned by Homer in the Iliad as having joined Thetis
in receiving Hephæstus.[44] And on the same day annually they open the
temple of Eurynome: for at all other times they keep it shut. And on
that day they have both public and private sacrifices to her. I was not
in time for the festival, nor did I see the statue of Eurynome. But I
heard from the Phigalians that the statue has gold chains round it, and
that it is a woman down to the waist and a fish below. To the daughter
of Oceanus who dwelt with Thetis in the depths of the sea these fish
extremities would be suitable: but I do not see any logical connection
between Artemis and a figure of this kind.

Phigalia is surrounded by mountains, on the left by Cotilius, on the
right by the projecting mountain Elaion. Cotilius is about 40 stades
from Phigalia, and on it is a place called Bassæ, and a temple of
Apollo the Helper, the roof of which is of stone. This temple would
stand first of all the temples in the Peloponnese, except that at
Tegea, for the beauty of the stone and neatness of the structure. And
Apollo got his title of Helper in reference to a pestilence, as among
the Athenians he got the title of Averter of Ill because he turned away
from them some pestilence. He helped the Phigalians about the time
of the Peloponnesian war, as both titles of Apollo shew plainly, and
Ictinus the builder of the temple at Phigalia was a contemporary of
Pericles, and the architect of what is called the Parthenon at Athens.
I have already mentioned the statue of Apollo in the market-place at
Megalopolis.

And there is a spring of water on Mount Cotilius, from which somebody
has written that the river Lymax takes its rise, but he can neither
have seen the spring himself, nor had his account from any one who
had seen it. I have done both: and the water of the spring on Mount
Cotilius does not travel very far, but in a short time gets lost in the
ground altogether. Not that it occurred to me to inquire in what part
of Arcadia the river Lymax rises. Above the temple of Apollo the Helper
is a place called Cotilum, where there is a temple of Aphrodite lacking
a roof, as also a statue of the goddess.

[43] Iliad, i. 314.

[44] Iliad, xviii. 398, 399, 405.




CHAPTER XLII.


The other mountain, Elaion, is about 30 stades from Phigalia, and
there is a cave there sacred to Black Demeter. All the traditions
that the people of Thelpusa tell about the amour of Poseidon with
Demeter are also believed by the people of Phigalia. But the latter
differ in one point: they say Demeter gave birth not to a foal but to
her that the Arcadians call Despœna. And after this they say, partly
from indignation with Poseidon, partly from sorrow at the rape of
Proserpine, she dressed in black, and went to this cave and nobody
knew of her whereabouts for a long time. But when all the fruits of
the earth were blighted, and mankind was perishing from famine, and
none of the gods knew where Demeter had hidden herself but Pan, who
traversed all Arcadia, hunting in various parts of the mountains, and
had seen Demeter dressed as I have described on Mount Elaion, then
Zeus learning all about this from Pan sent the Fates to Demeter, and
she was persuaded by them to lay aside her anger, and to wean herself
from her grief. And in consequence of her abode there, the Phigalians
say that they considered this cave as sacred to Demeter, and put in it
a wooden statue of the goddess, fashioned as follows. The goddess is
seated on a rock, like a woman in all respects but her head, which is
that of a mare with a mare’s mane, and figures of dragons and other
monsters about her head, and she has on a tunic which reaches to the
bottom of her feet. In one hand she has a dolphin, in the other a dove.
Why they delineated the goddess thus is clear to everybody not without
understanding who remembers the legend. And they call her Black Demeter
because her dress is black. They do not record who this statue was by
or how it caught fire. But when the old one was burnt the Phigalians
did not offer another to the goddess, but neglected her festivals
and sacrifices, till a dearth came over the land, and when they went
to consult the oracle the Pythian Priestess gave them the following
response:

“Arcadians, acorn-eating Azanes who inhabit Phigalia, go to the secret
cave of the horse-bearing Demeter, and inquire for alleviation from
this bitter famine, you that were twice Nomads living alone, living
alone feeding upon roots. Demeter taught you something else besides
pasture, she introduced among you the cultivation of corn, though you
have deprived her of her ancient honours and prerogatives. But you
shall eat one another and dine off your children speedily, if you do
not propitiate her wrath by public libations, and pay divine honours to
the recess in the cave.”

When the Phigalians heard this oracular response, they honoured Demeter
more than before, and got Onatas of Ægina, the son of Mico, for a great
sum of money to make them a statue of the goddess. This Onatas made a
brazen statue of Apollo for the people of Pergamus, most wonderful both
for its size and artistic merit. And he having discovered a painting
or copy of the ancient statue, but perhaps chiefly, so the story goes,
from a dream he had, made a brazen statue of Demeter for the people
of Phigalia, a generation after the Persian invasion of Greece. Here
is the proof of the correctness of my date. When Xerxes crossed into
Europe Gelon the son of Dinomenes was ruler of Syracuse and the rest
of Sicily, and after his death the kingdom devolved upon his brother
Hiero, and as Hiero died before he could give to Olympian Zeus the
offerings he had vowed for the victories of his horses, Dinomenes his
son gave them instead. Now Onatas made these, as the inscriptions at
Olympia over the votive offering show.

“Hiero having been formerly victor in your august contests, Olympian
Zeus, once in the fourhorse chariot, and twice with a single horse,
bestows on you these gifts: his son Dinomenes offers them in memory of
his Syracusan father.”

And the other inscription is as follows,

 “Onatas the son of Mico made me, a native of Ægina.” Onatas was
 therefore a contemporary of the Athenian Hegias and the Argive
 Ageladas.

I went to Phigalia chiefly to see this Demeter, and I sacrificed to
the goddess in the way the people of the country do, no victim but
the fruit of the vine and other trees, and honeycombs, and wool in an
unworked state with all its grease still on it, and these they lay on
the altar built in front of the cave, and pour oil over all. This
sacrifice is held every year at Phigalia both publicly and privately.
A priestess conducts the ritual, and with her the youngest of the
three citizens who are called Sacrificing Priests. Round the cave is
a grove of oak trees, and warm water bubbles up from a spring. The
statue made by Onatas was not there in my time, nor did most people at
Phigalia know that it had ever existed, but the oldest of those I met
with informed me that 3 generations before his time some stones from
the roof fell on to it, and that it was crushed by them and altogether
smashed up, and we can see plainly even now traces in the roof where
the stones fell in.




CHAPTER XLIII.


Pallantium next demands my attention, both to describe what is worthy
of record in it, and to show why the elder Antonine made it a town
instead of a village, and also free and exempt from taxation. They say
that Evander was the best of the Arcadians both in council and war,
and that he was the son of Hermes by a Nymph the daughter of Lado, and
that he was sent with a force of Arcadians from Pallantium to form a
colony, which he founded near the river Tiber. And part of what is now
Rome was inhabited by Evander and the Arcadians who accompanied him,
and was called Pallantium in remembrance of the town in Arcadia. And
in process of time it changed its name into Palatium. It was for these
reasons that Pallantium received its privileges from the Roman Emperor.
This Antonine, who bestowed such favours on Pallantium, imposed no war
on the Romans willingly, but when the Mauri, (the most important tribe
of independent Libyans, who were Nomads and much more formidable than
the Scythians, as they did not travel in waggons but they and their
wives rode on horseback,) commenced a war with Rome, he drove them
out of all their territory into the most remote parts, and compelled
them to retire from Libya to Mount Atlas and to the neighbourhood of
Mount Atlas. He also took away from the Brigantes in Britain most of
their territory, because they had attacked the Genunii who were Roman
subjects. And when Cos and Rhodes cities of the Lycians and Carians
were destroyed by a violent earthquake, the Emperor Antonine restored
them by large expenditure of money and by his zeal in re-peopling them.
As to the grants of money which he made to the Greeks and barbarians
who stood in need of them, and his magnificent works in Greece and
Ionia and Carthage and Syria, all this has been minutely described
by others. This Emperor left another token of his liberality. Those
subject nations who had the privilege of being Roman citizens, but
whose sons were reckoned as Greeks, had the option by law of leaving
their money to those who were no relations, or letting it swell the
wealth of the Emperor. But Antonine allowed them to leave their
property to their sons, preferring to exhibit philanthropy rather than
to maintain a law which brought in money to the revenue. This Emperor
the Romans called Pius from the honour he paid to the gods. I think
he might also justly have borne the title of the elder Cyrus, Father
of mankind. He was succeeded by his son Antonine, who fought against
the Germans, the most numerous and warlike barbarians in Europe, and
subdued the Sauromatæ who had commenced an iniquitous war.




CHAPTER XLIV.


To return to our account of Arcadia, there is a road from Megalopolis
to Pallantium and Tegea, leading to what is called the Mound. On this
road is a suburb of Megalopolis, called Ladocea from Ladocus the son
of Echemus. And next comes Hæmoniæ, which in ancient times was a town
founded by Hæmon the son of Lycaon, and is still called Hæmoniæ. And
next it on the right are the ruins of Oresthasium, and the pillars of
a temple to Artemis surnamed the Priestess. And on the direct road
from Hæmoniæ is the place called Aphrodisium, and next to it Athenæum,
on the left of which is a temple of Athene and stone statue of the
goddess. About 20 stades from Athenæum are the ruins of Asea, and the
hill which was formerly the citadel has still remains of walls. And
about 5 stades from Asea is the Alpheus a little away from the road,
and near the road is the source of the Eurotas. And near the source of
the Alpheus is a temple of the Mother of the Gods without a roof, and
two lions in stone. And the Eurotas joins the Alpheus, and for about
20 stades they flow together in a united stream, till they are lost
in a cavity and come up again, the Eurotas in Laconia, the Alpheus
at Pegæ in Megalopolis. There is also a road from Asea leading up to
Mount Boreum, on the top of which are traces of a temple. The tradition
is that Odysseus on his return from Ilium built it to Poseidon and
Preserver Athene.

What is called the Mound is the boundary for the districts of
Megalopolis Tegea and Pallantium, and as you turn off from it to the
left is the plain of Pallantium. In Pallantium there is a temple,
and a stone statue of Pallas and another of Evander, and a temple to
Proserpine the daughter of Demeter, and at no great distance a statue
of Polybius. The hill above the town was used of old as the citadel,
and on the top of it are remains even to our day of a temple of the
gods called Pure, oaths by whom are still accounted most weighty. They
do not know the particular names of these gods, or if they know they
will not tell them. But one might conjecture that they were called
Pure, because Pallas did not sacrifice to them in the same way as his
father did to Lycæan Zeus.

And on the right of what is called the Mound is the Manthuric plain on
the borders of Tegea, being indeed only 50 stades from Tegea. There is
a small hill on the right of the road called Cresium, on which is the
temple of Aphneus. For according to the legend of the people of Tegea
Ares had an intrigue with Aerope, the daughter of Cepheus the son of
Aleus, and she died in childbirth, and the baby still clung to his
mother though she was dead, and sucked from her breasts a plentiful
supply of milk, and as Ares had caused this they called the god
Aphneus, and the boy was called they say Aeropus. And on the road to
Tegea is the well called Leuconius, so called from Leucone, (who they
say was a daughter of Aphidas), whose tomb is not far from Tegea.




CHAPTER XLV.


The people of Tegea say that their district got its name in the days of
Tegeates the son of Lycaon, and that the inhabitants were distributed
into 8 parishes, Gareatæ, Phylaces, Caryatæ, Corythes, Potachidæ, Œatæ,
Manthyres, and Echeuethes, and that in the reign of Aphidas a ninth
parish was formed, called after him Aphidas. The founder of the town
in our day was Aleus. The people of Tegea besides the public events
which they had a share in in common with all the Arcadians, as the
war against Ilium, and the war with the Persians, and the battle with
the Lacedæmonians at Dipæa, had special renown of their own from the
following circumstances. Ancæus the son of Lycurgus, though wounded,
sustained the attack of the Calydonian boar, and Atalanta shot at it
and was the first to hit it, and for this prowess its head and hide
were given her as trophies. And when the Heraclidæ returned to the
Peloponnese, Echemus of Tegea, the son of Aeropus, had a combat with
Hyllus and beat him. And the people of Tegea were the first Arcadians
who beat the Lacedæmonians who fought against them, and took most of
them captive.

The ancient temple at Tegea of Athene Alea was built by Aleus, but
in after times the people at Tegea built the goddess a great and
magnificent temple. For the former one was entirely consumed by fire
which spread all over it, when Diophantus was Archon at Athens, in the
second year of the 96th Olympiad, in which Eupolemus of Elis won the
prize in the course. The present one far excels all the temples in the
Peloponnese for beauty and size. The architecture of the first row of
pillars is Doric, that of the second row is Corinthian, and that of the
pillars outside the temple is Ionic. The architect I found on inquiry
was Scopas the Parian, who made statues in various parts of old Greece,
and also in Ionia and Caria. On the gables is represented the hunting
of the boar of Calydon, on one side of the boar, nearly in the centre
of the piece, stand Atalanta and Meleager and Theseus and Telamon and
Peleus and Pollux and Iolaus, the companion of Hercules in most of his
Labours, and the sons of Thestius, Prothous and Cometes, the brothers
of Althæa: and on the other side of the boar Ancæus already wounded and
Epochus supporting him as he drops his weapon, and near him Castor,
and Amphiaraus the son of Œcles, and besides them Hippothous the son
of Cercyon, the son of Agamedes, the son of Stymphelus, and lastly
Pirithous. On the gables behind is a representation of the single
combat between Telephus and Achilles on the plain of Caicus.




CHAPTER XLVI.


And the ancient statue of Athene Alea, and together with it the tusks
of the Calydonian boar, were carried away by the Emperor Augustus,
after his victory over Antony and his allies, among whom were all the
Arcadians but the Mantineans. Augustus does not seem to have commenced
the practice of carrying off votive offerings and statues of the gods
from conquered nations, but to have merely followed a long-established
custom. For after the capture of Ilium, when the Greeks divided the
spoil, the statue of Household Zeus was given to Sthenelus the son of
Capaneus: and many years afterwards, when the Dorians had migrated
to Sicily, Antiphemus, the founder of Gela, sacked Omphace a town of
the Sicani, and carried from thence to Gela a statue made by Dædalus.
And we know that Xerxes the son of Darius, the king of the Persians,
besides what he carried off from Athens, took from Brauron a statue of
Brauronian Artemis, and moreover charged the Milesians with cowardice
in the sea-fight against the Athenians at Salamis, and took from them
the brazen Apollo at Branchidæ, which a long time afterwards Seleucus
sent back to the Milesians. And the statues taken from the Argives at
Tiryns are now, one in the temple of Hera, the other in the temple of
Apollo at Elis. And the people of Cyzicus having forced the people
of Proconnesus to settle with them took from them a statue of the
Dindymene Mother. The statue generally was of gold, but the head
instead of ivory was made with the teeth of Hippopotamuses. So the
Emperor Augustus merely followed a long established custom usual both
among Greeks and barbarians. And you may see the statue of Athene Alea
in the Forum at Rome built by Augustus. It is throughout of ivory
and the workmanship of Endœus. Those who busy themselves about such
curiosities say that one of the tusks of the boar was broken off, and
the remaining one was suspended as a votive offering in Cæsar’s gardens
in the temple of Dionysus. It is about 2½ feet long.




CHAPTER XLVII.


And the statue now at Tegea of Athene, called Hippia by the Manthurii,
because (according to their tradition) in the fight between the gods
and the giants the goddess drove the chariot of Enceladus, though among
the other Greeks and Peloponnesians the title Alea has prevailed, was
taken from the Manthurii. On one side of the statue of Athene stands
Æsculapius, on the other Hygiea in Pentelican marble, both by the
Parian Scopas. And the most notable votive offerings in the temple are
the hide of the Calydonian boar, which is rotten with lapse of time
and nearly devoid of hair, and some fetters hung up partly destroyed
by rust, which the captives of the Lacedæmonians wore when they dug in
the district of Tegea. And there is the bed of Athene, and an effigy
of Auge to imitate a painting, and the armour of Marpessa, called the
Widow, a woman of Tegea, of whom I shall speak hereafter. She was a
priestess of Athene when a girl, how long I do not know but not after
she grew to womanhood. And the altar they say was made for the goddess
by Melampus the son of Amythaon: and on the altar are representations
of Rhea and the Nymph Œnoe with Zeus still a babe, and on each side
4 Nymphs, on the one side Glauce and Neda and Thisoa and Anthracia,
and on the other Ida and Hagno and Alcinoe and Phrixa. There are also
statues of the Muses and Mnemosyne.

And not far from the temple is a mound of earth, constituting a
race-course, where they hold games which they call Aleæa from Athene
Alea, and Halotia because they took most of the Lacedæmonians alive
in the battle. And there is a spring towards the north of the temple,
near which they say Auge was violated by Hercules, though their legend
differs from that of Hecatæus about her. And about 3 stades from this
spring is the temple of Hermes called Æpytus.

At Tegea there is also a temple to Athene Poliatis, which once every
year the priest enters. They call it the temple of Protection, and
say that it was a boon of Athene to Cepheus, the son of Aleus, that
Tegea should never be captured, and they say that the goddess cut off
one of the locks of Medusa, and gave it him as a protection for the
city. They have also the following legend about Artemis Hegemone.
Aristomelidas the ruler at Orchomenus in Arcadia, being enamoured of a
maiden of Tegea, got her somehow or other into his power, and committed
the charge of her to one Chronius. And she before being conducted to
the tyrant slew herself in modesty and fear. And Artemis stirred up
Chronius in a dream against Aristomelidas, and he slew him and fled to
Tegea and built there a temple to Artemis.




CHAPTER XLVIII.


In the market-place, which is in shape very like a brick, is a temple
of Aphrodite called the Brick Aphrodite, and a stone statue of the
goddess. And there are two pillars, on one of which are effigies of
Antiphanes and Crisus and Tyronidas and Pyrrhias, who are held in
honour to this day as legislators for Tegea, and on the other pillar
Iasius, with his left hand on a horse and in his right hand a branch
of palm. He won they say the horserace at Olympia, when Hercules the
Theban established the Olympian games. Why a crown of wild olive was
given to the victor at Olympia I have shown in my account of Elis, and
why of laurel at Delphi I shall show hereafter. And at the Isthmian
games pine, at the Nemean games parsley, were wont to be the prize, as
we know from the cases of Palæmon and Archemorus. But most games have
a crown of palm as the prize, and everywhere the palm is put into the
right hand of the victor. The beginning of this custom was as follows.
When Theseus was returning from Crete he instituted games they say to
Apollo at Delos, and himself crowned the victors with palm. This was
they say the origin of the custom, and Homer has mentioned the palm in
Delos in that part of the Odyssey where Odysseus makes his supplication
to the daughter of Alcinous.[45]

There is also a statue of Ares called Gynæcothœnas in the market-place
at Tegea, graven on a pillar. For in the Laconian war, at the first
invasion of Charillus the king of the Lacedæmonians, the women took up
arms, and lay in ambush under the hill called in our day Phylactris.
And when the armies engaged, and the men on both sides exhibited
splendid bravery, then they say the women appeared on the scene, and
caused the rout of the Lacedæmonians, and Marpessa, called the Widow,
excelled all the other women in daring, and among other Spartans
Charillus was taken prisoner, and was released without ransom, upon
swearing to the people of Tegea that he would never again lead a
Lacedæmonian army to Tegea, which oath he afterwards violated. And the
women privately sacrificed to Ares independently of the men for the
victory, and gave no share of the flesh of the victim to the men. That
is why Ares was called Gynæcothœnas (_i.e._ _Women’s Feast_). There
is also an altar and square statue of Adult Zeus. Square statues the
Arcadians seem greatly to delight in. There are also here the tombs of
Tegeates the son of Lycaon, and Mæra the wife of Tegeates, who they say
was the daughter of Atlas, and is mentioned by Homer[46] in Odysseus’
account to Alcinous of his journey to Hades and the souls he saw there.
And in the market-place at Tegea there is a temple of Ilithyia, and
a statue called Auge on her knees, and the tradition is that Aleus
ordered Nauplius to take his daughter Auge and drown her in the sea,
and as she was being led there she fell on her knees, and gave birth to
a son on the spot where is now the temple of Ilithyia. This tradition
differs from another one, which states that Auge gave birth to Telephus
unbeknown to her father, and that he was exposed on Mount Parthenium
and suckled by a doe, though this last part of the tradition is also
recorded by the people of Tegea. And near the temple of Ilithyia is
an altar to Earth, and close to the altar is a pillar in white stone,
on which is a statue of Polybius the son of Lycortas, and on another
pillar is Elatus one of the sons of Arcas.

[45] Odyssey, vi. 162 _sq._

[46] Odyssey, xi. 326.




CHAPTER XLIX.


And not far from the market-place is a theatre, and near it are the
bases of some brazen statues, the statues themselves are no longer
there. And an elegiac couplet on one of the bases says that that was
the statue of Philopœmen. This Philopœmen the Greeks hold in the
highest honour, both for his sagacity and exploits. As to the lustre
of his race his father Craugis was second to none of the Arcadians
of Megalopolis, but he dying when Philopœmen was quite a boy his
guardian was Cleander an exile from Mantinea, who had come to live at
Megalopolis after the troubles in his native place, and had been on a
footing of old friendship with the family of Craugis. And Philopœmen
had they say among other tutors Megalophanes and Ecdelus: the sons
of Arcesilaus were pupils they say of Pitanæus. In size and strength
he was inferior to none of the Peloponnesians, but he was far from
good-looking. He didn’t care about contending in the games, but he
cultivated his own piece of ground, and was fond of hunting wild
beasts. He read also they say frequently the works of the most famous
Greek sophists, and books on the art of war, especially such as touched
on strategy. He wished in all things to make Epaminondas his model in
his frame of mind and exploits, but was not able in all points to come
up to this. For Epaminondas was especially mild and had his temper
completely under control, whereas Philopœmen was hot-tempered. But
when Cleomenes captured Megalopolis, Philopœmen was not dismayed at
this unexpected misfortune, but conveyed off safely two-thirds of the
adults and all the women and children to Messene, as the Messenians
were at that time their allies and well-disposed to them. And when
Cleomenes sent a message to these exiles that he was sorry for what
he had done, and that the people of Megalopolis might return if they
signed a treaty, Philopœmen persuaded all the citizens to return only
with arms in their hands, and not upon any conditions or treaty. And
in the battle which took place at Sellasia against Cleomenes and
the Lacedæmonians, in which the Achæans and Arcadians from all the
cities took part, and also Antigonus with an army from Macedonia,
Philopœmen took his place with the cavalry at first, but when he saw
that the issue of the battle turned on the behaviour of the infantry
he willingly became a footsoldier, and, as he was displaying valour
worthy of record, one of the enemy pierced through both his thighs,
and being so impeded he dropt on his knees and was constrained to fall
forwards, so that by the motion of his feet the spear snapped off. And
when Cleomenes and the Lacedæmonians were defeated, and Philopœmen
returned to the camp, then the doctors cut out of his thighs the
spearpoint and the spear itself. And Antigonus, hearing and seeing
his courage, was anxious to invite him over to Macedonia. But he paid
little heed to Antigonus, and crossed over by ship to Crete, where a
civil war was raging, and became a captain of mercenaries. And on his
return to Megalopolis he was at once chosen by the Achæans commander of
their cavalry, and he made them the best cavalry in Greece. And when
the Achæans and all their allies fought at the river Larisus against
the men of Elis and the Ætolian force that aided the people of Elis
from kinsmanship, Philopœmen first slew with his own hands Demophantus
the commander of the enemy’s cavalry, and then put to flight all the
cavalry of the Ætolians and men of Elis.




CHAPTER L.


And as the Achæans left everything to him and made him everybody,
he changed the arms of the infantry, for, whereas before they bore
short spears and oblong shields like those in use among the Celts and
Persians (called _thyrei_ and _gerrha_), he persuaded them to wear
breastplates and greaves, and also to use the shields in use in Argolis
and long spears. And when Machanidas rose to power in Lacedæmon, and
war again broke out between the Achæans and the Lacedæmonians under
him, Philopœmen was commander in chief of the Achæan force, and in the
battle of Mantinea the light-armed Lacedæmonians beat the light-armed
troops of the Achæans, and Machanidas pressed upon them in their
flight, but Philopœmen forming his infantry into a square routed the
Lacedæmonian hoplites, and fell in with Machanidas as he was returning
from the pursuit and slew him. Thus the Lacedæmonians, though they lost
the battle, were more fortunate from their reverse than one would have
anticipated, for they were freed from their tyrant. And not long after,
when the Argives were celebrating the Nemean games, Philopœmen happened
to be present at the contest of the harpers: and Pylades a native of
Megalopolis (one of the most noted harpers of the day who had carried
off the victory at the Pythian games), at that moment striking up the
tune of the Milesian Timotheus called Persæ, and commencing at the words

    “Winning for Hellas the noble grace of freedom,”

all the Greeks gazed earnestly on Philopœmen, and signified by clapping
that they referred to him the words of the Ode. A similar tribute
of respect was I understand paid to Themistocles at Olympia, where
the whole theatre rose up on his entrance. Philip indeed, the son of
Demetrius, the king of the Macedonians, who also poisoned Aratus of
Sicyon, sent men to Megalopolis with orders to kill Philopœmen, and
though unsuccessful in this he was execrated by all Greece. And the
Thebans who had beaten the Megarians in battle, and had already got
inside the walls at Megara, through treachery on the part of the
Megarians, were so alarmed at the arrival of Philopœmen to the rescue,
that they went home again without effecting their object. And again
there rose up at Lacedæmon a tyrant called Nabis, who attacked the
Messenians first of the Peloponnesians, and as he made his attack by
night, when they had no expectation of it, he took all Messene but the
citadel, but upon Philopœmen’s coming up the next day with an army he
departed from it on conditions of war.

And Philopœmen, when the time of his command expired, and other Achæans
were chosen as commanders, went a second time to Crete and helped
the Gortynians who were pressed hard in war. But as the Arcadians
were vexed with him for going abroad he returned from Crete, and
found the Romans at war with Nabis. And as the Romans had equipped a
fleet against Nabis, Philopœmen in his zeal wished to take part in
the contest, but being altogether without experience of the sea, he
unwittingly embarked on an unseaworthy trireme, so that the Romans
and their allies remembered the lines of Homer, in his Catalogue
of the ships, about the ignorance of the Arcadians in maritime
affairs.[47] And not many days after this naval engagement Philopœmen
and his regiment, taking advantage of a dark night, set the camp of
the Lacedæmonians at Gythium on fire. Thereupon Nabis intercepted
Philopœmen and all the Arcadians with him on difficult ground, they
were very brave but there were very few of them. But Philopœmen changed
the position of his troops, so that the advantage of the ground rested
with him and not with the enemy, and, defeating Nabis and slaying
many of the Lacedæmonians in this night attack, raised his fame still
higher among the Greeks. And after this Nabis obtained from the Romans
a truce for a certain definite period, but before the time expired he
was assassinated by a man from Calydon, who had come ostensibly to
negotiate an alliance, but was really hostile, and had been suborned by
the Ætolians for this very purpose.

[47] Iliad, ii. 614.




CHAPTER LI.


And Philopœmen about this time made an incursion into Sparta, and
compelled the Lacedæmonians to join the Achæan League. And not very
long after Titus Flaminius, the commander in chief of the Romans in
Greece, and Diophanes the son of Diæus of Megalopolis, who had been
chosen at this time general of the Achæans, marched against Lacedæmon,
alleging that the Lacedæmonians were plotting against the Romans: but
Philopœmen, although at present he was only a private individual, shut
the gates as they were coming in. And the Lacedæmonians, in return for
this service and for his success against both their tyrants, offered
him the house of Nabis, which was worth more than 100 talents; but
he had a soul above money, and bade the Lacedæmonians conciliate by
their gifts instead of him those who had persuasive powers with the
people in the Achæan League. In these words he referred they say to
Timolaus. And he was chosen a second time general of the Achæans. And
as the Lacedæmonians at that time were on the eve of a civil war, he
exiled from the Peloponnese about 300 of the ringleaders, and sold for
slaves about 3000 of the Helots, and demolished the walls of Sparta,
and ordered the lads no longer to train according to the regulations of
Lycurgus but in the Achæan fashion. But the Romans afterwards restored
to them their national training. And when Antiochus (the descendant
of Seleucus Nicator) and the army of Syrians with him were defeated
by Manius and the Romans at Thermopylæ, and Aristænus of Megalopolis
urged the Achæans to do all that was pleasing to the Romans and not
to resist them at all, Philopœmen looked angrily at him, and told him
that he was hastening the fate of Greece. And when Manius was willing
to receive the Lacedæmonian fugitives, he resisted this proposal before
the Council. But on Manius’ departure, he permitted the fugitives to
return to Sparta.

But vengeance was about to fall on Philopœmen for his haughtiness.
For when he was appointed general of the Achæans for the 8th time, he
twitted a man not without some renown for having allowed the enemy to
capture him alive: and not long after, as there was a dispute between
the Messenians and Achæans, he sent Lycortas with an army to ravage
Messenia: and himself the third day afterwards, though he was suffering
from a fever and was more than 70, hurried on to share in the action
of Lycortas, at the head of about 60 cavalry and targeteers. And
Lycortas and his army returned home without having done or received
any great harm. But Philopœmen, who had been wounded in the head in
the action and had fallen off his horse, was taken alive to Messene.
And in a meeting which the Messenians immediately held there were many
different opinions as to what they should do with him. Dinocrates
and the wealthy Messenians were urgent to put him to death: but the
popular party were most anxious to save him alive, calling him even
the father of all Greece. But Dinocrates in spite of the popular party
took Philopœmen off by poison. And Lycortas not long after collected a
force from Arcadia and from Achaia and marched against Messene, and the
popular party in Messene at once fraternized with them, and all except
Dinocrates who were privy to the murder of Philopœmen were put to
death. And he committed suicide. And the Arcadians brought the remains
of Philopœmen to Megalopolis.




CHAPTER LII.


And now Greece ceased to produce a stock of distinguished men.
Miltiades the son of Cimon, who defeated the barbarians that landed
at Marathon, and checked the Persian host, was the first public
benefactor of Greece, and Philopœmen the son of Craugis the last. For
those who before Miltiades had displayed conspicuous valour, (as Codrus
the son of Melanthus, and the Spartan Polydorus, and the Messenian
Aristomenes), had all clearly fought for their own nation and not for
all Greece. And after Miltiades Leonidas (the son of Anaxandrides) and
Themistocles (the son of Neocles) expelled Xerxes from Greece, the
latter by his two sea-fights, the former by the action at Thermopylæ.
And Aristides the son of Lysimachus, and Pausanias the son of
Cleombrotus, who commanded at Platæa, were prevented from being called
benefactors of Greece, the latter by his subsequent crimes, the former
by his laying tribute on the Greek islanders, for before Aristides
all the Greek dominions were exempt from taxation. And Xanthippus
the son of Ariphron, in conjunction with Leotychides king of Sparta,
destroyed the Persian fleet off Mycale, and Cimon did many deeds to
excite the emulation of the Greeks. As for those who won the greatest
renown in the Peloponnesian war, one might say that they with their
own hands almost ruined Greece. And when Greece was already in pitiful
plight, Conon the son of Timotheus and Epaminondas the son of Polymnis
recovered it somewhat, the former in the islands and maritime parts,
the latter by ejecting the Lacedæmonian garrisons and governors inland,
and by putting down the decemvirates. Epaminondas also made Greece
more considerable by the addition of the well-known towns of Messene
and the Arcadian Megalopolis. I consider also Leosthenes and Aratus
the benefactors of all Greece, for Leosthenes against the wishes of
Alexander brought back safe to Greece in ships 50,000 Greeks who had
served under the pay of Persia: as for Aratus I have already touched
upon him in my account of Sicyon.

And the following is the inscription on Philopœmen at Tegea. “Spread
all over Greece is the fame and glory of the Arcadian warrior
Philopœmen, as wise in the council-chamber as brave in the field, who
attained such eminence in war as cavalry leader. Two trophies won he
over two Spartan tyrants, and when slavery was growing he abolished it.
And therefore Tegea has erected this statue to the high souled son of
Craugis, the blameless winner of his country’s freedom.”




CHAPTER LIII.


That is the inscription at Tegea. And the statues erected to Apollo
Aguieus by the people of Tegea were dedicated they say for the
following reason. Apollo and Artemis punished they say in every place
all persons who, when Leto was pregnant and wandering about Arcadia,
neglected and took no account of her. And when Apollo and Artemis
came into the district of Tegea, then they say Scephrus, the son of
Tegeates, went up to Apollo and had a private conversation with him.
And Limon his brother, thinking Scephrus was making some charge against
him, ran at his brother and slew him. But swift vengeance came upon
Limon, for Artemis at once transfixed him with an arrow. And Tegeates
and Mera forthwith sacrificed to Apollo and Artemis, and afterwards
when a mighty famine came upon the land the oracle at Delphi told them
to mourn for Scephrus. Accordingly they pay honours to him at the
festival of Apollo Aguieus, and the priestess of Artemis pursues some
one, pretending that she is Artemis pursuing Limon. And the remaining
sons of Tegeates, Cydon and Archedius and Gortys, migrated they say of
their own accord to Crete, and gave their names to the towns Cydonia
and Gortys and Catreus. But the Cretans do not accept the tradition of
the people of Tegea, they say that Cydon was the son of Acacallis the
daughter of Minos and Hermes, and that Catreus was the son of Minos,
and Gortys the son of Rhadamanthus. About Rhadamanthus Homer says, in
the conversation between Proteus and Menelaus, that Menelaus went to
the Elysian fields, and before him Rhadamanthus: and Cinæthon in his
verses represents Rhadamanthus as the son of Hephæstus, and Hephæstus
as the son of Talos, and Talos as the son of Cres. The traditions of
the Greeks are mostly different and especially in genealogies. And
the people of Tegea have 4 statues of Apollo Aguieus, one erected by
each tribe. And the names of the tribes are Clareotis, Hippothœtis,
Apolloniatis, and Atheneatis, the two former so called from the lots
which Arcas made his sons cast for the land, and from Hippothous the
son of Cercyon.

There is also at Tegea a temple to Demeter and Proserpine, the
goddesses whom they call Fruit-giving, and one near to Paphian
Aphrodite, which was erected by Laodice, who was, as I have stated
before, a daughter of that Agapenor who led the Arcadians to Troy, and
dwelt at Paphos. And not far from it are two temples to Dionysus, and
an altar to Proserpine, and a temple and gilt statue of Apollo, the
statue by Chirisophus, a Cretan by race, whose age and master we do not
know. But the stay of Dædalus at Minos’ court in Crete, and the statues
which he made, has brought much greater fame to Crete. And near Apollo
is a stone statue of Chirisophus himself.

And the people of Tegea have an altar which they call common to all
Arcadians, where there is a statue of Hercules. He is represented as
wounded in the thigh with the wound he received in the first fight
which he had with the sons of Hippocoon. And the lofty place dedicated
to Zeus Clarius, where most of the altars at Tegea are, is no doubt so
called from the lots which the sons of Arcas cast. And the people of
Tegea have an annual festival there, and they say the Lacedæmonians
once invaded their territory at the time of the festival, and the god
sent snow, and they were cold, and weary from the weight of their
armour, and the people of Tegea unbeknown to the enemy lit a fire, (and
so they were not incommoded with the cold), and put on their armour,
and went out against them, and overcame them in the action. I have also
seen at Tegea the following sights, the house of Aleus, and the tomb of
Echemus, and a representation on a pillar of the fight between Echemus
and Hyllus.

As you go from Tegea towards Laconia, there is an altar of Pan on the
left of the road, and another of Lycæan Zeus, and there are ruins of
temples. Their altars are about 2 stades from the walls, and about
seven stades further is a temple of Artemis called Limnatis, and a
statue of the goddess in ebony. The workmanship is called Æginætan by
the Greeks. And about 10 stades further are ruins of the temple of
Artemis Cnaceatis.




CHAPTER LIV.


The boundary between the districts of the Lacedæmonians and Tegea is
the river Alpheus, which rises at Phylace, and not far from its source
another river flows into it formed from several unimportant streams,
and that is why the place is called the Meeting of the Waters. And the
Alpheus seems in the following particular to be contrary in its nature
to all other rivers, it is frequently lost in the ground and comes up
again. For starting from Phylace and the Meeting of the Waters it is
lost in the plain of Tegea, and reappears again at Asea, and after
mixing its stream with the Eurotas is a second time lost in the ground:
and emerging again at what the Arcadians call the Wells, and flowing
by the districts of Pisa and Olympia, it falls into the sea beyond
Cyllene, the arsenal of the people of Elis. Nor can the Adriatic,
though a big and stormy sea, bar its onward passage, for it reappears
at Ortygia in Syracuse, and mixes its waters with the Arethusa.

The straight road, leading to Thyrea and the villages in the Thyreatic
district, is memorable for containing the tomb of Orestes the son of
Agamemnon, the people of Tegea say that a Spartan removed his remains
from thence, but in our day there is no tomb within the walls. The
river Garates also flows by the road, when you have crossed it and gone
on ten stades you come to a temple of Pan, and near it an oak also
sacred to Pan.

The road from Tegea to Argos is very well adapted for carriages and
is in fact quite a high road. The first thing you come to on it is a
temple and statue of Æsculapius, and after turning to the left for
about a stade you come to a temple of Pythian Apollo quite fallen to
decay and in ruins. And on the high road are many oaks and a temple of
Demeter, called Demeter of Corythes, in a grove of oaks, and near it
is a temple to Mystic Dionysus. And next comes Mount Parthenium, on
which is shown an enclosure sacred to Telephus, where they say he was
exposed as a boy and brought up by a doe. And at a little distance is
the temple of Pan, where both the Athenians and people of Tegea say
that Pan appeared to Philippides and had an interview with him. Mount
Parthenium also has tortoises admirably adapted for making lyres of,
which the men who live on the mountain fear to take and will not allow
strangers to take, for they consider them sacred to Pan. When you have
crossed over the mountain top you come in what is now arable land to
the boundary between the districts of Tegea and Argos, _viz_. Hysiæ in
Argolis.

These are the divisions of the Peloponnese, and the towns in the
divisions, and the most notable things in each town.




BOOK IX.--BŒOTIA.




CHAPTER I.


Bœotia is contiguous to Attica, and Platæa to Eleutheræ. The Bœotians
got that name for all the race from Bœotus, who they say was the son
of Itonus the son of Amphictyon and the Nymph Melanippe. Their towns
are called sometimes after men but more frequently after women. The
Platæans were I think the original inhabitants of the land, and they
got their name from Platæa the daughter of the river-god Asopus.
That they were originally ruled over by kings is I think clear: for
in old times kingdoms were all over Greece, there were no democratic
governments. But the Platæans know of no other kings but Asopus and
still earlier Cithæron, one of whom gave his name to the mountain and
the other to the river. And I cannot but think that Platæa, who gave
her name to the town, was the daughter of the king Asopus and not of
the river-god.

The Platæans did nothing memorable before the battle which the
Athenians fought at Marathon, but they took part in that struggle
after the landing of Xerxes, and ventured to embark on ships with
the Athenians, and repelled on their own soil Mardonius, the son of
Gobryas, the General of Xerxes. And it twice happened to them to
be driven from their country and again restored to it. For in the
Peloponnesian war the Lacedæmonians besieged and took Platæa: and
when, after the peace which Antalcidas the Spartan negotiated between
the Greeks and the king of the Persians, it was reinhabited by the
Platæans who returned from Athens, a second misfortune was it seems
destined to come upon them. For war was not openly declared against
the Thebans, but the Platæans said that they were still at peace with
them, because when the Lacedæmonians occupied Cadmea, they had no
share either in suggesting it or in bringing it about. The Thebans on
the other hand said that it was the Lacedæmonians who had brought about
the peace, and who afterwards when they had violated it thought that
all had broken truce. The Platæans therefore, thinking the conduct
of the Thebans rather suspicious, occupied their town with a strong
garrison, and the farmers did not even go into the fields which were
at some distance from the town at every period of the day, but watched
for the times when the Thebans held their general meetings, and at such
times tilled their farms in quiet. But Neocles, who was at that time
Bœotarch at Thebes, and had noticed this cunning on the part of the
Platæans, told all the Thebans to go armed to the assembly, and led
them from Thebes not straight across the plain but in the direction of
Hysiæ and Eleutheræ and Attica, where no outposts had been placed by
the Platæans, and got to the walls about mid-day. For the Platæans,
thinking the Thebans were at their meeting, had shut the gates and
gone out to the fields. And the Thebans made conditions with those who
were in the town that they should leave the place before sunset, the
men with one dress and the women with two. At this time the fortune
of the Platæans was rather different from the former occasion when
the town was taken by the Lacedæmonians and Archidamus. For then the
Lacedæmonians blockaded them and shut them in by a double wall so that
they could not get out, whereas now the Thebans prevented their getting
into the town at all. This second capture of Platæa was the third year
after Leuctra, when Asteus was Archon at Athens. And the town was rased
to the ground by the Thebans entirely except the temples, but there
was no sack, and the Athenians took in the Platæans a second time. But
when Philip was victorious at Chæronea, he introduced a garrison into
Thebes, and among other things to destroy the Theban power, restored
the Platæans.




CHAPTER II.


If you turn off a little to the right from the high road in the
Platæan district near Mount Cithæron, you come to the ruins of Hysiæ
and Erythræ. They were formerly cities, and among the ruins of Hysiæ
there is still a temple of Apollo half-finished, and a Holy Well, of
which whoever drank in former days prophesied, if we may believe the
tradition of the Bœotians. And on your return to the high road on the
right is what is said to be the tomb of Mardonius. It is admitted
that the dead body of Mardonius was missing after the battle, but as
to who buried him there are different traditions. What is certain is
that Artontes the son of Mardonius gave many gifts to the Ephesian
Dionysophanes, and also to several Ionians, for not having neglected
his father’s burial. And this road leads from Eleutheræ to Platæa.

As you go from Megara there is a spring on the right hand, and a little
further a rock called the bed of Actæon, because they say he used to
sleep on that rock when tired with hunting, and in that spring they
say he saw Artemis bathing. And Stesichorus of Himera has represented
the goddess as dressing Actæon in a deerskin, so that his dogs should
devour him, that he should not be married to Semele. But I think that
madness came upon the dogs of Actæon without the intervention of
the goddess, and if they were mad and did not distinguish him they
would rend in pieces whoever they met. In what part of Mount Cithæron
Pentheus the son of Echion met with his fate, or where they exposed
Œdipus after his birth, no one knows, as we do know the cross-roads
on the way to Phocis where Œdipus slew his father. Mount Cithæron is
sacred to Zeus of Cithæron, but I shall enter into all that more fully
when I come to that part of my subject.

Near the entrance to Platæa is the tomb of those who fell fighting
against the Medes. The other Greeks have one common tomb. But the
Lacedæmonians and Athenians who fell have separate burial-grounds, and
some elegiac lines of Simonides as their epitaph. And not far from the
common tomb of the Greeks is the altar of Zeus Eleutherius. The tombs
are of brass, but the altar and statue of Zeus are of white stone. And
they celebrate still every fifth year the festival called Eleutheria,
in which the chief prizes are for running: they run in heavy armour in
front of the altar. And the Greeks set up a trophy about 15 stades from
the town for the battle at Platæa.

In the town of Platæa, as you go on from the altar and statue erected
to Zeus Eleutherius, is a hero-chapel to Platæa, I have already stated
the traditions about her and my own views. There is also a temple of
Hera, well worth seeing for its size and the beauty of the statues. As
you enter it Rhea is before you carrying to Cronos the stone wrapt up
in swaddling-clothes, pretending it was the child she had just given
birth to. And the Hera here they call Full-Grown, her statue is a
large one in a standing position. Both these statues are in Pentelican
marble by Praxiteles. There is also another statue of Hera in a sitting
position by Callimachus, they call this statue The Bride for the
following reason.




CHAPTER III.


They say Hera for some reason or other was displeased with Zeus and
went to Eubœa, and Zeus when he could not appease her went to Cithæron
(who ruled at Platæa), who was inferior to no one in ingenuity. He
recommended Zeus to make a wooden statue and dress it up and draw it in
a waggon with a yoke of oxen, and give out that he intended to marry
Platæa the daughter of Asopus. And he did as Cithæron instructed him.
And directly Hera heard of it she returned at once, and approached
the waggon and tore the clothes of the statue, and was delighted with
the trick when she found a wooden image instead of a young bride,
and was reconciled to Zeus. In memory of this reconciliation they
have a festival called Dædala, because statues were of old called
_dædala_. And they called them so I think before the times of Dædalus
the Athenian, the son of Palamaon, for he was called Dædalus I take
it from his statues, and not from his birth up. This festival is
celebrated by the Platæans every seventh year, according to what
my Antiquarian guide informed me, but really at less interval: the
exact time however between one festival and the next though I wished
I could not ascertain. The festival is celebrated as follows. There
is an oak-coppice not far from Alalcomenæ. Of all the oaks in Bœotia
the roots of these are the finest. When the Platæans come to this
oak-coppice, they place there portions of boiled meat. And they do not
much trouble themselves about other birds, but they watch crows very
carefully, for they frequent the place, and if one of them seizes a
piece of meat they watch what tree it sits upon. And on whatever tree
it perches, they carve their wooden image, called _dædalum_, from the
wood of this tree. This is the way the Platæans privately celebrate
their little festival Dædala: but the great festival of Dædala is a
festival for all Bœotia and celebrated every sixth year; for that
was the interval during which the festival was discontinued when the
Platæans were in exile. And 14 wooden statues are provided by them
every year for the little festival Dædala, which the following draw
lots for, the Platæans, the Coronæans, the Thespians, the Tanagræans,
the Chæroneans, the Orchomenians, the Lebadeans, and the Thebans: for
they thought fit to be reconciled with the Platæans, and to join their
gathering, and to send their sacrifice to the festival, when Cassander
the son of Antipater restored Thebes. And all the small towns which
are of lesser note contribute to the festival. They deck the statue
and take it to the Asopus on a waggon, and place a bride on it, and
draw lots for the order of the procession, and drive their waggons
from the river to the top of Cithæron, where an altar is prepared for
them constructed in the following manner. They get square pieces of
wood about the same size, and pile them up one upon one another as if
they were making a stone building, and raise it to a good height by
adding firewood. The chief magistrates of each town sacrifice a cow to
Hera and a bull to Zeus, and they burn on the altar all together the
victims (full of wine and incense) and the wooden images, and private
people offer their sacrifices as well as the rich, only they sacrifice
smaller animals as sheep, and all the sacrifices are burnt together.
And the fire consumes the altar as well as the sacrifices, the flame
is prodigious and visible for an immense distance. And about 15 stades
lower than the top of the mountain where they build this altar is
a cave of the Nymphs of Mount Cithæron, called Sphragidion, where
tradition says those Nymphs prophesied in ancient times.




CHAPTER IV.


The Platæans have also a temple to Arean Athene, which was built from
the spoil given to them by the Athenians after the battle of Marathon.
The statue of the goddess is wooden but gilt over: the head and fingers
and toes are of Pentelican marble. In size it is nearly as large as
the brazen one in the Acropolis, (which the Athenians dedicated as
the firstfruits of the battle at Marathon,) and is also the work of
Phidias. And there are paintings in the temple by Polygnotus, Odysseus
having just slain the suitors, and by Onatas the first expedition of
Adrastus and the Argives against Thebes. These paintings are on the
walls in the vestibule of the temple, and at the base of the statue of
the goddess is an effigy of Arimnestus, who commanded the Platæans in
the fight against Mardonius and still earlier at Marathon.

There is also at Platæa a temple of Eleusinian Demeter, and the tomb of
Leitus, the only leader of the Bœotians that returned home after the
Trojan war. And the fountain Gargaphia was fouled by Mardonius and the
Persian cavalry, because the Greek army opposed to them drank of it,
but the Platæans afterwards made the water pure again.

As you go from Platæa to Thebes you come to the river Oeroe, Oeroe was
they say the daughter of Asopus. And before crossing the Asopus, if
you turn aside and follow the stream of the Oeroe for about 40 stades,
you come to the ruins of Scolus, among which are a temple of Demeter
and Proserpine not complete, and half the statues of the goddesses.
The Asopus is still the boundary between the districts of Platæa and
Thebes.




CHAPTER V.


The district of Thebes was they say first inhabited by the Ectenes,
whose king was the Autochthon Ogygus, hence many of the poets have
called Thebes Ogygiæ. And the Ectenes they say died off with some
pestilence, and Thebes was repeopled by the Hyantes and Aones, Bœotian
races I imagine and not foreigners. And when Cadmus and his Phœnician
army invaded the land the Hyantes were defeated in battle and fled
the following night, but the Aones were submissive and were allowed
by Cadmus to remain in the land and mix with the Phœnicians. They
continued to live in their villages, but Cadmus built the town called
to this day Cadmea. And afterwards when the town grew, Cadmea was
the citadel for lower Thebes. Cadmus made a splendid marriage if,
according to the Greek tradition, he married the daughter of Aphrodite
and Ares, and his daughters were famous, Semele as the mother of a son
by Zeus, and Ino as one of the sea goddesses. Amongst the greatest
contemporaries of Cadmus were the Sparti, Chthonius and Hyperenor and
Pelorus and Udæus: and Echion was chosen by Cadmus as his son-in-law
for his conspicuous valour. About these men I could obtain no further
knowledge, so I follow the general tradition about the origin of the
name Sparti.[48] And when Cadmus migrated to the Illyrians and to
those of them who were called Enchelians, he was succeeded by his
son Polydorus. And Pentheus the son of Echion had great power both
from the lustre of his race and the friendship of the king, though he
was haughty and impious and justly punished by Dionysus. The son of
Polydorus was Labdacus. He on his death left a son quite a boy, whom as
well as the kingdom he entrusted to Nycteus. The sequel I have already
set forth in my account about Sicyonia, as the circumstances attending
the death of Nycteus, and how the guardianship of the boy and care
of the realm devolved upon Lycus the brother of Nycteus: and the boy
dying also not long after Lycus became guardian for Laius the son of
Labdacus.

It was during Lycus’ second guardianship that Amphion and Zethus
invaded the country with a band of men. And those who were anxious for
the continuance of Cadmus’ race withdrew Laius, and Lycus was defeated
in battle by the sons of Antiope. And during their reign they joined
the lower town to Cadmea, and called it Thebes from their relationship
to Thebe. And I am borne out by the lines of Homer in the Odyssey:[49]

“Who first gave its towers and seven gates to Thebes, for though they
were strong, they could not dwell in a spacious unfortified Thebes.”

As to the legend about Amphion’s singing and the walls being built as
he played on his harp, Homer has made no mention of it in his poems.
But Amphion was famous for music, and from his relationship to Tantalus
learnt the harmony of the Lydians, and added three strings to the lyre,
which had previously had only four. And the author of the poem about
Europa says that Amphion was the first who played on the lyre, and
that Hermes taught him how: and that by his strains he drew stones and
animals. And Myro, the Byzantian poetess who wrote epic and elegiac
verses, says that Amphion first erected an altar to Hermes and received
from him the lyre on it. It is said also that in Hades Amphion paid
the penalty for his railing against Leto and her sons. This punishment
of his is mentioned in the poem called the Minyad, and there are
references in it both to Amphion and the Thracian Thamyris. And when
the family of Amphion was destroyed by pestilence, and the son of
Zethus was slain by his mother for some fault or other, and Zethus also
died of grief, then the Thebans restored Laius to the kingdom.

When Laius was king and wedded to Jocasta, the oracle at Delphi told
him that he would die at the hands of his son, if Jocasta bare him one.
And that was why he exposed Œdipus, who was fated after all when he
grew up to kill his father. He also married his mother. But I do not
think he had any children by her. My authority for this view is Homer,
who in his Odyssey has the following lines.[50]

“I also saw the mother of Œdipus, beautiful Epicaste, who did a
horrible deed, unwittingly marrying her own son, for he married her
after slaying his father, but soon the gods made it publicly known.”

But how could they soon make it publicly known,[51] if Œdipus had
4 children by Jocasta? So they were the children of Euryganea the
daughter of Hyperphas, as is shown by the poet who wrote the poems
called the Œdipodia. Onatas also painted for the people of Platæa
Euryganea dejected at the quarrels of her sons. And it was in the
lifetime and during the reign of Œdipus that Polynices departed from
Thebes, fearing that the curses of his father would be fulfilled: and
he went to Argos and married the daughter of Adrastus, and returned to
Thebes after the death of Œdipus, being sent for by Eteocles. And on
his return he quarrelled with Eteocles, and went into exile a second
time. And having begged of Adrastus a force to restore him, he lost his
army and challenged Eteocles to single combat. And he and his brother
killed each other, and as the kingdom devolved upon Laodamas the son
of Eteocles, Creon the son of Menœceus ruled as guardian for the boy.
And when Laodamas grew up and took the reins of power, then a second
time the Argives led an army against Thebes. And the Thebans encamping
against them at Glisas, Laodamas slew in the action Ægialeus the son
of Adrastus, but the Argives gaining the victory Laodamas with those
Thebans that were willing to follow him withdrew the night following to
the Illyrians. And the Argives captured Thebes, and delivered it over
to Thersander the son of Polynices. And when some of those who were
going with Agamemnon to the siege of Troy sailed out of their course,
and met with a reverse at Mysia, then it was that Thersander, who was
the bravest of the Greeks in the battle, was slain by Telephus, and his
tomb is in stone as you drive over the plain of Caicus in the town of
Elæa, in the part of the market-place which is in the open air, and the
people of the country say that funeral rites are paid to him. And after
the death of Thersander, when a second fleet was got together against
Paris and Ilium, they chose Peneleos as their leader because Tisamenus
the son of Thersander was not yet old enough. But when Peneleos was
killed by Eurypylus the son of Telephus, they chose Tisamenus as their
king, the son of Thersander by Demonassa the daughter of Amphiaraus.
And Tisamenus suffered not from the wrath of the Furies of Laius and
Œdipus, but Autesion his son did, so that he migrated to the Dorians
at the bidding of the oracle. And on his departure they chose as king
Damasichthon, the son of Opheltes the son of Peneleos. His son was
Ptolemæus, and his Xanthus, who was slain by Andropompus in single
combat by treachery and not fairly. And thenceforward the Thebans
resolved to entrust their government to several magistrates, and not to
let everything depend on one man.

[48] Namely, that they were armed men who sprang up from the dragon’s
teeth sown by Cadmus.

[49] Odyssey, xi. 263-265.

[50] Odyssey, xi. 271-274.

[51] Perhaps Pausanias is hyper-critical here. Is he not answered by
the following line in the ὑπόθεσις to Œdipus Tyrannus, λοιμὸς δὲ Θήβας
εἶλε καὶ νόσος μακρά?




CHAPTER VI.


Of their successes and reverses in war I found the following to be the
most notable. They were beaten by the Athenians in battle, when the
Athenians fought on the side of the Platæans in the war about borders.
They were beaten a second time by the Athenians in the neighbourhood
of Platæa, when they seem to have preferred the interests of king
Xerxes to those of Greece. The popular party was not to blame for that,
for at that time Thebes was ruled by an oligarchy, and not by their
national form of government. And no doubt if the barbarian had come
to Greece in the days when Pisistratus and his sons ruled at Athens
the Athenians also would have been open to the charge of Medizing.
Afterwards however the Thebans were victorious over the Athenians
at Delium in the district of Tanagra, when Hippocrates, the son of
Ariphron, the Athenian General perished with most of his army. And
the Thebans were friendly with the Lacedæmonians directly after the
departure of the Medes till the war between the Peloponnesians and the
Athenians: but after the conclusion of that war, and the destruction
of the Athenian navy, the Thebans soon joined the Corinthians against
the Lacedæmonians. And after being beaten in battle at Corinth and
Coronea, they were victorious at the famous battle of Leuctra, the
most famous of all the battles between Greeks that we know of, and
they put down the decemvirates that the Lacedæmonians had established
in their towns, and ejected the Lacedæmonian Harmosts. And afterwards
they fought continuously for 10 years in the Phocian War, called by the
Greeks the Sacred War. I have already in my account of Attica spoken
about the reverse that befell all the Greeks at Chæronea, but it fell
most heavily on the Thebans, for a Macedonian garrison was put into
Thebes; but after the death of Philip and accession of Alexander the
Thebans took it into their head to eject this garrison: and when they
did so the god warned them of their coming ruin, and in the temple of
Demeter Thesmophorus the omens were just the reverse of what they were
before Leuctra: for then the spiders spun white webs near the doors of
the temple, but now at the approach of Alexander and the Macedonians
they spun black webs. There is also a tradition that it rained ashes
at Athens the year before Sulla began the war which was to cause the
Athenians so many woes.




CHAPTER VII.


And now the Thebans were expelled from Thebes by Alexander, and escaped
to Athens, and were restored by Cassander the son of Antipater. And the
Athenians were very friendly in this restoration to Thebes, and the
Messenians and Arcadians of Megalopolis also gave their help. And I
think Cassander restored Thebes chiefly out of hatred to Alexander: for
he endeavoured to destroy all the house of Alexander, for he ordered
the Macedonians (who were exceedingly angry with her) to stone to death
Olympias _Alexander’s mother_, and he poisoned the sons of Alexander,
Hercules his son by Barsine, and Alexander his son by Roxana. Nor did
he himself terminate his life happily, for he was swollen with the
dropsy, and eaten up by worms. And of his sons, Philip the eldest not
long after his accession was taken off by consumption, and Antipater
the next killed his mother Thessalonice, the daughter of Philip (the
son of Amyntas) and Nicasipolis. His motive for putting her to death
was that she was too partial to Alexander her youngest son. And
Alexander invited in Demetrius the son of Antigonus, and succeeded by
his help in deposing his brother Antipater, and punishing him for his
matricide, but seemed in Demetrius to find rather a murderer than ally.
Thus was Cassander punished by the gods. In his lifetime the Thebans
rebuilt all their old walls, but were destined it seemed to taste great
misfortunes still. For they joined Mithridates in his war against
Rome, I think only out of friendship to the Athenian people. But when
Sulla invaded Bœotia panic seized the Thebans, and they repented, and
tried to get again the friendship of the Romans. But Sulla was wroth
with them, and found out other means of injuring them, and took half
their territory on the following pretext. When he began the war with
Mithridates he was short of money, he collected therefore the votive
offerings from Olympia, and Epidaurus, and from Delphi all that the
Phocians had left. These he distributed among his troops, and gave the
gods in return half Thebais instead of money. The land thus taken away
the Thebans afterwards got back by the favour of the Romans, but in
other respects became thenceforwards weaker and weaker, and in my time
the lower part of the city was quite deserted except the temples, and
the citadel which they still inhabit is called Thebes and not Cadmea.




CHAPTER VIII.


And when you have crossed the Asopus, and gone about 10 stades from
Thebes, you come to the ruins of Potniæ, among which is a grove to
Demeter and Proserpine. And the statues by the river they call the
Potnian goddesses. And at a stated season they perform other customary
rites, and admit sucking pigs into what are called the Halls: and take
them at the same season the year following to Dodona, believe it who
likes. Here too is a temple of Dionysus Ægobolus (_Goat-killer_). For
in sacrificing to the god on one occasion the people of Potniæ were
so outrageous through drunkenness that they even killed the priest of
Dionysus: and straightway a pestilence came on them, and the oracle at
Delphi told them the only cure was to sacrifice to Dionysus a grown
boy, and not many years afterwards they say the god accepted a goat as
victim instead. They also shew a well at Potniæ, in which they say if
the horses of the district drink they go mad.

As you go from Potniæ to Thebes there is on the right of the road a
small enclosure and pillars in it: this it is thought is the place
where the earth opened and swallowed up Amphiaraus, and they add that
neither do birds sit on these pillars, nor do animals tame or wild feed
on the grass.

At Thebes within the circuit of the old walls were seven gates which
remain to this day, and all have their own names. The gate _Electris_
is called from Electra the sister of Cadmus, and _Prœtisis_ from
Prœtus, a native of Thebes whose date and genealogy it would be
difficult to ascertain. And the gate _Neiste_ got its name from the
following circumstance; one of the chords in the lyre is called _nete_,
and Amphion discovered this chord at this very gate. Another account is
that Zethus the brother of Amphion had a son called Neis, and that this
gate got its name from him. And there is the gate _Crenæa_, so called
from a fountain. And there is the gate called _Highest_, so called from
the temple of Highest Zeus. And the sixth gate is called _Ogygia_. And
the seventh gate is called _Homolois_, this is the most recently named
gate I think, (as _Ogygia_ is the oldest-named,) and got its name from
the following circumstance. When the Thebans were beaten in battle
by the Argives at Glisas, most of them fled with Laodamas the son of
Eteocles, but part of them shrank from a journey to the Illyrii, and
turned aside into Thessaly and occupied Homole, the most fertile and
well-watered of all the Thessalian mountains. And when Thersander the
son of Polynices restored them to Thebes, they called the gate by which
they entered Homolois in memory of Homole. As you go from Platæa to
Thebes you enter by the gate Electris, and it was here they say that
Capaneus the son of Hipponous, making a most violent attack on the
walls, was struck with lightning.[52]




CHAPTER IX.


I think this war which the Argives fought is the most memorable of all
the wars which were fought between Greeks in the days of the heroes.
For the war between the Eleusinians and the Athenians, as likewise that
between the Thebans and the Minyæ, was terminated by one engagement,
and they were soon friends again. But the Argive host came from the
middle of the Peloponnese to the middle of Bœotia, and Adrastus
got together allies from Arcadia and Messenia. And likewise some
mercenaries came to help the Thebans from Phocis, as also the Phlegyæ
from the district of the Minyæ. And in the battle that took place at
Ismenius the Thebans were beaten at the first onset, and when they were
routed fled to the city, and as the Peloponnesians did not know how to
fight against fortifications, but attacked them with more zeal than
judgment, the Thebans slew many of them from the walls, and afterwards
made a sally and attacked them as they were drawn up in order of battle
and killed the rest, so that the whole army was cut to pieces except
Adrastus. But the battle was not without heavy loss to the Thebans, and
ever since they call a victory with heavy loss to the victors a Cadmean
victory.[53] And not many years afterwards those whom the Greeks call
Epigoni marched against Thebes with Thersander. Their army was clearly
swelled not only from Argolis, but also from Messenia and Arcadia,
and from Corinth and Megara. And the Thebans were aided by their
neighbours, and a sharp fight took place at Glisas, well contested on
both sides. But the Thebans were beaten, and some of them fled with
Laodamas, and the rest were reduced after a blockade. The epic poem
called the Thebais has reference to this war. Callinus who mentions
that poem says that it was written by Homer, and his view is held by
several respectable authorities. But I think it is of a later date than
the Iliad and Odyssey. But let this account suffice for the war between
the Argives and the Thebans about the sons of Œdipus.

[52] See Æschylus, _Septem contra Thebas_, 423 _sq._

[53] See Erasmi _Adagia_.




CHAPTER X.


Not far from the gates is a large sepulchre to all those who fell in
battle against Alexander and the Macedonians. And at no great distance
they show the place where they say, believe it who will, that Cadmus
sowed the teeth of the dragon that he slew by the well, and that the
ground produced a crop of armed men from these teeth.

And there is a hill sacred to Apollo on the right of the gates, the
hill and the god and the river that flows by are all called Ismenius.
At the approach to the temple are statues of Athene and Hermes in
stone, called gods of the Vestibule, Hermes by Phidias and Athene by
Scopas, and next comes the temple itself. And the statue of Apollo in
it is in size and appearance very like the one at Branchidæ. Whoever
has seen one of these statues and learnt the statuary’s name will
not need much sagacity, if he sees the other, to know that it is by
Canachus. But they differ in one respect, the one at Branchidæ being
in bronze, the Ismenian in cedarwood. There is here also the stone on
which they say Manto the daughter of Tiresias sate. It is near the
entrance, and its name even to this day is Manto’s seat. And on the
right of the temple are two stone statues, one they say of Henioche
the other of Pyrrha, both daughters of Creon, who ruled as guardian
of Laodamas the son of Eteocles. And still at Thebes I know they
choose annually a lad of good family, good looking and strong, as
priest to Ismenian Apollo: his title is laurel-bearer, because these
lads wear crowns of laurel-leaves. I do not know whether all who wear
these laurel crowns must dedicate to the god a brazen tripod, and I
don’t think that can be the usage, for I did not see many tripods so
offered. But the wealthiest lads certainly do offer these tripods.
Especially notable for age and the celebrity of the person who gave it
is that given by Amphitryon, Hercules wearing the laurel crown.

Somewhat higher than the temple of Apollo Ismenius you will see the
spring which is they say sacred to Ares, who placed a dragon there
to guard it. Near it is the tomb of Caanthus, who was they say the
brother of Melia and the son of Oceanus, and was sent by his father to
seek for his sister who had been carried off. But when he found Apollo
with Melia he could not take her away, so he dared to set the grove of
Ismenian Apollo on fire, and the god transfixed him with an arrow, so
the Thebans say, and here is his tomb. And they say Melia bare Apollo
two sons Tenerus and Ismenius, to Tenerus Apollo gave the power of
divination, and Ismenius gave his name to the river. Not that it was
without a name before, if indeed it was called Ladon before the birth
of Apollo’s son Ismenius.




CHAPTER XI.


On the left of the gate called Electris are the ruins of the house
where they say Amphitryon dwelt, when he fled from Tiryns owing to the
death of Electryon. And among the ruins is to be seen the bridal-bed
of Alcmena, which was made they say for Amphitryon by Trophonius and
Agamedes, as the inscription states,

 “When Amphitryon was going to marry Alcmena, he contrived this
 bridal-bed for himself, and Anchasian Trophonius and Agamedes made it.”

This is the inscription which the Thebans say is written here: and
they also show the monument of the sons of Hercules by Megara, giving
a very similar account about their death to that which Stesichorus of
Himera and Panyasis have written in their poems. But the Thebans add
that Hercules in his madness wished also to kill Amphitryon, but sleep
came upon him in consequence of a blow from a stone, and they say
Athene threw the stone, which they call Composer. There too are some
statues of women on a figure, rather indistinct from age, the Thebans
call them Sorceresses, and say that they were sent by Hera to prevent
Alcmena from childbirth. Accordingly they tried to do so, but Historis
the daughter of Tiresias played a trick on them, she cried out in their
hearing, and they thought Alcmena had just given birth to a child, so
they went away deceived, and then they say Alcmena bare a boy.

Here too is a temple of Hercules called Champion, his statue is of
white stone by Xenocritus and Eubius, both Thebans: the old wooden
statue the Thebans think is by Dædalus and I think so too. He made it,
so the story goes, in return for an act of kindness. For when he fled
from Crete the boats he made were not large enough both for himself and
Icarus his son, and he also employed sails, an invention not known in
his day, that he might get the advantage of the boats of Minos (which
were only rowed) by availing himself of a favourable wind, and he
got off safe, but Icarus steering his boat rather awkwardly it upset
they say, and he was drowned, and his dead body carried by the waves
to an island beyond Samos which then had no name. And Hercules found
and recognised the corpse, and buried it, where now is a mound of no
great size, by the promontory that juts out into the Ægean Sea. And
the island and the sea near it got their names from Icarus. And on the
gables Praxiteles has carved most of the 12 Labours of Hercules, all
in short but the killing of the Stymphelian birds, and the cleansing
of the country of Elis, and instead of these is a representation of
the wrestling with Antæus. And when Thrasybulus the son of Lycus and
the Athenians with him put down the Thirty Tyrants, (they had started
from Thebes on their return from exile), they offered to this temple of
Hercules colossal statues of Athene and Hercules in Pentelican marble,
by Alcamenes.

Near the temple of Hercules are a gymnasium and racecourse both called
after the god. And beyond the stone Composer is an altar of Apollo
Spodius, made of the ashes of the victims. There is divination there by
omens, which kind of divination I know the people of Smyrna use more
than all the other Greeks, for they have outside their walls beyond the
city a Temple of Omens.




CHAPTER XII.


The Thebans used of old to sacrifice bulls to Apollo Spodius: but on
one occasion during the festival when the time for the sacrifice drew
nigh, and those who had been sent for the bull did not come with it,
they sacrificed to the god one of the oxen in a waggon that chanced
to be near, and since that time they have sacrificed oxen employed in
labour. They also tell this tradition, that Cadmus when travelling
from Delphi to Phocis was guided on his journey by a cow which he had
purchased from the herds of Pelagon, which had on each side a white
mark like the orb of the moon at the full. Cadmus and all the army
with him were according to the oracle to make their home where the cow
should lie down tired. This spot they show. There in the open air is an
altar and statue of Athene, erected they say by Cadmus. To those who
think that Cadmus came to Thebes from Egypt and not from Phœnicia this
name of Athene affords refutation: for she is called Onga which is a
Phœnician word, and not by the Egyptian name Sais. And the Thebans say
that the house of Cadmus was originally in that part of the citadel
where the market-place now is: and they shew the ruins of the bridal
chambers of Harmonia and Semele, this last they do not allow men to
enter even to this day. And those Greeks who believe that the Muses
sang at the marriage of Harmonia say that this spot in the market-place
is where they sang. There is also a tradition that together with the
lightning that struck the bridal-chamber of Semele fell a piece of wood
from heaven: and Polydorus they say adorned this piece of wood with
brass, and called it Dionysus Cadmus. And very near is the statue of
Dionysus, made by Onasimedes of brass throughout, the altar was made by
the sons of Praxiteles.

There is also the statue of Pronomus, a man most attractive as a
flute-player. For a long time flute-players had only three kinds of
flutes, for some played in the Dorian measure, and other flutes were
adapted to the Phrygian and Lydian measures. And Pronomus was the first
who saw that flutes were fit for every kind of measure, and was the
first to play different measures on the same flute. It is said also
that by the appearance of his features and the motion of all his body
he gave wonderful pleasure in the theatre, and a processional song of
his is extant for the dwellers at Chalcis near the Euripus who came
to Delos. To him and to Epaminondas the son of Polymnis the Thebans
erected statues here.




CHAPTER XIII.


Epaminondas was of illustrious descent, but his father was very poor
even for an average Theban, and he learnt very carefully the national
education, and when he was quite a stripling went to school to Lysis
the Tarentine, who had been a pupil of Pythagoras of Samos. And, when
the Lacedæmonians were at war with the Mantineans, Epaminondas is said
to have been sent amongst others from Thebes to aid the Lacedæmonians.
And when Pelopidas was wounded in the battle, he ran great risks to
bring him out of it safe. And afterwards when Epaminondas went on
an embassy to Sparta, when the Lacedæmonians agreed to ratify with
the Greeks the peace known as the peace of Antalcidas, and Agesilaus
asked him if the Thebans would allow the various towns in Bœotia to
subscribe to the peace separately, “Not,” he answered, “O Spartans,
until we see your neighbouring towns setting us the example.” And when
war at last broke out between the Lacedæmonians and the Thebans, and
the Lacedæmonians attacked the Thebans with their own forces and those
of their allies, Epaminondas with part of his army stationed himself
near the marsh Cephisis, as the Peloponnesians were going to make their
attack in that quarter, but Cleombrotus the king of the Lacedæmonians
turned aside to Ambrosus in Phocis, and after slaying Chæreas, who had
been ordered to guard the by-roads, and the men who were with him,
passed by and got to Leuctra in Bœotia. There Cleombrotus and the
Lacedæmonians generally had portents from the gods. The Spartan kings
when they went out to war used to be accompanied by flocks of sheep, to
sacrifice to the gods and to give them good omens before battles. These
flocks were led by a particular kind of goat that the shepherds called
_catoiades_. And on this occasion some wolves attacked the flocks but
did no harm to the sheep, only slew the goats. Vengeance is said to
have come upon the Lacedæmonians in consequence of the daughters of
Scedasus. Scedasus lived at Leuctra and had two daughters Molpia and
Hippo. They were very beautiful and two Lacedæmonians, Phrurarchidas
and Parthenius, iniquitously violated them, and they forthwith hung
themselves, for this outrage was more than they could bear: and
Scedasus, when he could get no reparation at Lacedæmon for this
outrage, returned to Leuctra and committed suicide. Then Epaminondas
offered funeral rites to Scedasus and his daughters, and vowed that a
battle should take place there, as much for their vengeance as for the
safety of Thebes. But the Bœotarchs were not all of the same view, but
differed in their opinions. Epaminondas and Malgis and Xenocrates were
for engaging the Lacedæmonians without delay, whereas Damoclidas and
Damophilus and Simangelus were against an engagement, and recommended
the withdrawal of the women and children into Attica, and that they
should themselves prepare for a siege. Thus the votes of the six were
equally divided, but the vote of the 7th Bœotarch on his return to
the camp, (he had been on the look-out at Cithæron, and his name was
Bacchylides), being given on the side of Epaminondas, it was agreed
to stake everything on a battle. Now Epaminondas had suspicions about
the fidelity of several of the Bœotians especially the Thespians,
fearing therefore that they would desert in the battle, he gave leave
to whoever would to go home, and the Thespians went off in full force,
and any other Bœotians who had ill-will to the Thebans. And when the
engagement came on, the allies of the Lacedæmonians, who had previously
not been overwell pleased with them, openly showed their hostility by
not standing their ground, but giving way wherever the enemy attacked.
But the battle between the Lacedæmonians and the Thebans was well
contested, the former relying on their long military experience and
ashamed to impair the old prestige of Sparta, while the latter saw
that the fate of their country their wives and children was staked on
the result of this fight. But after many Lacedæmonians of high rank
had fallen as also their king Cleombrotus, then the Spartans though
hard pressed felt obliged to continue the combat, for amongst the
Lacedæmonians it was considered most disgraceful to allow the dead body
of one of their kings to remain in the hands of the enemy.

This victory of the Thebans was the most notable of all victories won
by Greeks over Greeks: for the Lacedæmonians on the next day _instead
of renewing the battle_ purposed burying their dead, and sent a herald
to the Thebans to ask leave to do so. And Epaminondas knowing that it
was always the custom of the Lacedæmonians to conceal their losses,
said that their allies must first bury their dead, and afterwards he
would permit the Lacedæmonians to bury theirs. And as some of the
allies had none to bury, (as none of them were killed), and others had
lost only a few, the Lacedæmonians buried their dead, and thus it was
clear that most of the dead were Spartans. Of the Thebans and Bœotians
who remained to share in the battle there fell only 47 men, while the
Lacedæmonians lost more than 1,000.




CHAPTER XIV.


Directly after the battle Epaminondas allowed all the other
Peloponnesians to depart to their homes, but the Lacedæmonians he
kept shut up at Leuctra. But when he heard that the Spartans were
coming in full force to their relief, then he allowed them to depart
on conditions of war, for he said that it was better to fight on
Lacedæmonian than Bœotian ground. And the Thespians, looking with
regret at their past ill-will to the Thebans and with anxiety at their
present fortunes, thought it best to abandon their own city and flee
to Ceressus, a fortified place belonging to them, into which they had
formerly thrown themselves when the Thessalians invaded their country.
But the Thessalians on that occasion, as they seemed hardly likely
to capture Ceressus consulted the oracle at Delphi, and this was the
response they received. “Shady Leuctra and the Alesian soil are dear to
me, dear to me too are the unfortunate daughters of Scedasus. In the
future looms a lamentable battle there: but no one shall capture it
till the Dorians lose the flower of their young men, when its day of
fate shall have come. Then shall Ceressus be captured, but not before.”

And now when Epaminondas had captured Ceressus, and taken captive
the Thespians who had fled for refuge there, he forthwith turned his
attention to affairs in the Peloponnese, as the Arcadians eagerly
invited his co-operation. And when he went to the Peloponnese he made
the Argives his voluntary allies, and restored the Mantineans, who had
been dispersed in villages by Agesipolis, to Mantinea, and, as the
small towns of the Arcadians were insecure, he persuaded the Arcadians
to evacuate them, and established for them one large town still called
Megalopolis. By this time Epaminondas’ period of office as Bœotarch had
expired, and the penalty for continuing office longer was death. But
Epaminondas, considering the law an illtimed one, disregarded it and
continued Bœotarch: and marched with an army against Sparta and, as
Agesilaus declined a combat, turned his attention towards colonizing
Messene, as I have shewn in my account of Messenia. And meantime the
Theban allies overran Laconia and plundered it, scouring over the
whole country. This induced Epaminondas to take the Thebans back into
Bœotia. And when he got with his army as far as Lechæum, and was about
to pass through a narrow and difficult defile, Iphicrates the son of
Timotheus with a force of Athenians and some targeteers attacked him.
And Epaminondas routed them and pursued them as far as Athens, but
as Iphicrates would not allow the Athenians to go out and fight, he
returned to Thebes. And there he was acquitted for continuing Bœotarch
beyond the proper time: for it is said that none of the judges would
pass sentence upon him.




CHAPTER XV.


And after this when Alexander the ruler in Thessaly with a high hand
treacherously imprisoned Pelopidas, (who had come to his court as to
a ruler who was personally a friend of his and publicly a friend of
the Theban people), the Thebans immediately marched against Alexander,
putting at their head Cleomenes and Hypatus who were then Bœotarchs,
and Epaminondas happened to be one of the force. And when they were
near Pylæ, Alexander who lay in ambush attacked them in the pass. And
when they saw their condition was desperate, then the soldiers gave
the command to Epaminondas, and the Bœotarchs willingly conceded the
command. And Alexander lost his confidence in victory, when he saw
that Epaminondas had taken the command, and gave up Pelopidas. And
during the absence of Epaminondas the Thebans drove the Orchomenians
out of their country. Epaminondas looked on this as a misfortune, and
said the Thebans would never have committed this outrage had he been
at home. And as he was chosen Bœotarch again, he marched with an army
to the Peloponnese again, and beat the Lacedæmonians in battle at
Lechæum, and also the Achæans from Pellene and the Athenians who were
under the command of Chabrias. And it was the rule with the Thebans to
ransom all their prisoners, except Bœotian deserters, whom they put to
death. But Epaminondas after capturing a small town of the Sicyonians
called Phœbia, where were a good many Bœotian deserters, contented
himself with leaving a stigma upon them by calling them each by the
name of a different nationality. And when he got with his army as far
as Mantinea, he was killed in the moment of victory by an Athenian. The
Athenian who killed Epaminondas is represented in a painting at Athens
of the cavalry-skirmish to have been Gryllus, the son of that Xenophon
who took part in the expedition of Cyrus against king Artaxerxes, and
who led the Greeks back again to the sea.

On the statue of Epaminondas are four elegiac lines about him, that
tell how he restored Messene, and how the Greeks got their freedom
through him. These are the lines.

“Sparta cut off the glory from our councils, but in time sacred Messene
got back her children. Megalopolis was crowned by the arms of Thebes,
and all Greece became autonomous and free.”

Such were the glorious deeds of Epaminondas.




CHAPTER XVI.


And at no great distance from the statue of Epaminondas is the temple
of Ammon, the statue by Calamis and a votive offering from Pindar, who
also sent a Hymn in honour of Ammon to the Ammonians in Libya, which
Hymn is now inscribed on a triangular pillar near the altar which
Ptolemy the son of Lagus dedicated to Ammon. Next to the temple of
Ammon the Thebans have what is called Tiresias’ tower to observe the
omens, and near it is a temple of Fortune carrying in her arms Wealth
as a child. The Thebans say that Xenophon the Athenian made the hands
and face of the statue, and Callistonicus a native of Thebes all the
other parts. The idea is ingenious of putting Wealth in the hands of
Fortune as her mother or nurse, as is also the idea of Cephisodotus who
made for the Athenians a statue of Peace holding Wealth.

The Thebans have also some wooden statues of Aphrodite, so ancient
that they are said to be votive offerings of Harmonia, made out
of the wood of the gunwales of the ships of Cadmus. One they call
the Celestial Aphrodite, the other the Pandemian, and the third
the Heart-Turner. Harmonia meant by these titles of Aphrodite the
following. The Celestial is a pure love and has no connection with
bodily appetite, the Pandemian is the common vulgar sensual love,
and thirdly the goddess is called Heart-Turner because she turns the
heart of men away by lawless passion and unholy deeds. For Harmonia
knew that many bold deeds had been done in lawless passion both among
the Greeks and barbarians, such as were afterwards sung by poets, as
the legends about the mother of Adonis, and Phædra the daughter of
Minos, and the Thracian Tereus. And the temple of Law-giving Demeter
was they say formerly the house of Cadmus and his descendants. And the
statue of Demeter is only visible down to the chest. And there are some
brazen shields hung up here, which they say belonged to some of the
Lacedæmonian notables that fell at Leuctra.

At the gate called Prœtis is a theatre, and near it the temple of
Lysian Dionysus. The god was so called because, when some Thebans were
taken captive by the Thracians, and conducted to Haliartia, the god
freed them, and gave them an opportunity to kill the Thracians in their
sleep. One of the statues in the temple the Thebans say is Semele. Once
every year the temple is open on stated days. There are also the ruins
of the house of Lycus, and the sepulchre of Semele, it cannot be the
sepulchre of Alcmene, for when she died she became a stone. But the
Theban account about her differs from the Megarian: in fact the Greek
traditions mostly vary. The Thebans have here also monuments of the
sons and daughters of Amphion, the two sexes apart.




CHAPTER XVII.


And next is the temple of Artemis Euclea, the statue of the goddess is
by Scopas. They say the daughters of Antipœnus, Androclea and Alcis,
are buried in this temple. For when Hercules and the Thebans were going
to engage in battle with the Orchomenians, an oracle informed them
that, if any one of their most notable citizens in respect to birth
was willing to commit suicide, they would obtain victory in the war.
To Antipœnus, who was of most illustrious descent, it did not appear
agreeable to die for the people, but his daughters had no objection,
so they committed suicide and were honoured accordingly. In front of
the temple of Artemis Euclea is a lion in stone, which was it is said
a votive offering of Hercules, when he had vanquished in battle the
Orchomenians and their king Erginus the son of Clymenus. And near it is
a statue of Apollo Boedromius, and one of Hermes Agoræus, this last
the votive offering of Pindar. The funeral pile of the children of
Amphion is about half a stade from their tombs, the ashes still remain.
And near the statue of Amphitryon are they say two stone statues of
Athene Zosteria (_the Girder_), and they say Amphitryon armed himself
here, when he was on the point of engaging the Eubœans and Chalcodon.
The ancients called putting on one’s armour _girding oneself_: and they
say that when Homer represents Agamemnon as having a belt like Ares, he
refers to his armour.[54]

A mound of earth not very high is the sepulchre of Zethus and Amphion.
The inhabitants of Tithorea in Phocis like to carry away earth from
this mound when the Sun is in Taurus, for if they take of this soil
then, and put it on the tomb of Antiope, their land gains in fertility
while the Theban loses. So the Thebans guard the sepulchre at that time
of the year. And these two cities believe this in consequence of the
oracles of Bacis, in which the following lines occur.

 “Whenever a native of Tithorea shall pour libations on the earth to
 Amphion and Zethus, and offer prayers and propitiations when the Sun
 is in Taurus, then be on your guard against a terrible misfortune
 coming on your city: for the fruits of the earth will suffer a blight,
 if they take of the earth and put it on the sepulchre of Phocus.”

Bacis calls it the sepulchre of Phocus for the following reason.
_Dirce_, the wife of Lycus, honoured Dionysus more than any of the
gods, and when she suffered according to the tradition a cruel
death[55] he was angry with Antiope: and the excessive wrath of the
gods is somehow fatal. They say Antiope went mad and wandered over all
Greece out of her mind, and that Phocus the son of Ornytion the son of
Sisyphus fell in with her and cured her, and made her his wife. And
certainly Antiope and Phocus are buried together. And the stones by
the tomb of Amphion, which lie about in no particular order, are they
say those which followed Amphion’s music. Similar legends are told of
Orpheus, how the animals followed his harping.

[54] See Iliad, ii. 478, 479.

[55] See the story in Propertius, iv. 15.




CHAPTER XVIII.


The road to Chalcis from Thebes is by the gate Prœtis. On the high road
is the tomb of Melanippus, one of the greatest warriors of the Thebans,
who, when the Argives besieged Thebes, slew Tydeus and Mecisteus one of
the brothers of Adrastus, and was himself slain they say by Amphiaraus.
And very near this tomb are three rude stones, the Theban antiquarians
say that Tydeus was buried here, and that he was interred by Mæon. And
they confirm their statement by the following line from the Iliad,

    “Tydeus, who lies ’neath mound of earth at Thebes.”[56]

And next are the tombs of the children of Œdipus, I have not myself
seen the funeral rites performed to their memory, but I have received
trustworthy accounts. The Thebans say that they offer funeral
sacrifices to several heroes as well as to the children of Œdipus, and
that during these sacrifices the flame and smoke divide. I was induced
to credit this from the following thing which I have myself seen. In
Mysia above Caicus is a small city called Pioniæ, whose founder was
they say Pionis one of the descendants of Hercules, and when they are
celebrating his funeral sacrifices the smoke rises up from the tomb
spontaneously. I have myself seen this. The Thebans also show the tomb
of Tiresias, about 15 stades distant from the tomb of the children of
Œdipus: but they admit that Tiresias died in Haliartia, so that they
allow the tomb here to be a cenotaph.

The Thebans also shew the tomb of Hector the son of Priam near the Well
of Œdipus. They say that his remains were brought here from Ilium in
accordance with the following oracle.

“Ye Thebans, who inhabit the city of Cadmus, if ye wish your country
to enjoy abundant wealth, bring to your city from Asia Minor the bones
of Hector the son of Priam, and respect the hero at the suggestion of
Zeus.”

The Well is called Œdipus’ Well, because he washed off in it the blood
of his father’s murder. And near the Well is the tomb of Asphodicus,
who slew in the battle against the Argives Parthenopæus the son of
Talaus, (according to the tradition of the Thebans, for the verses
in the Thebais about the death of Parthenopæus say that Periclymenus
killed him).

[56] xiv. 114.




CHAPTER XIX.


On this high-road is a place called Teumessus, where they say Europa
was hidden by Zeus. And there is also a tradition about a fox of
Teumessus, that it was brought up to hurt the Thebans through the wrath
of Dionysus, and that, when it was about to be taken by the dog which
Artemis gave to Procris the daughter of Erechtheus, both dog and fox
were turned into stone. There is also at Teumessus a temple of Athene
Telchinia without a statue: as to her title Telchinia one may infer
that some of the Telchinians, who formerly dwelt at Cyprus and who
migrated into Bœotia, erected this temple to her under that title.

On the left of Teumessus about 7 stades further you come to the ruins
of Glisas, and before them on the right of the road is a small mound
shaded by a wild wood, and some trees have been planted there. It is
the tomb of those that went with Ægialeus the son of Adrastus on the
expedition against Thebes, and of several noble Argives, and among
them Promachus the son of Parthenopæus. The tomb of Ægialeus is at
Pagæ, as I have previously shown in my account about Megara. As you
go on the high road from Thebes to Glisas is a place, surrounded by
unhewn stones, which the Thebans call the head of the serpent. They
say this serpent lifted its head out of its hole, and Tiresias passing
by chopped its head off with his sword. That is how the place got its
name. And above Glisas is a mountain called Highest, and on it is
the temple and altar of Highest Zeus. And the torrent here they call
Thermodon. And as you turn towards Teumessus on the road to Chalcis
is the tomb of Chalcodon, who was slain by Amphitryon in the battle
fought by the Eubœans against the Thebans. And next come the ruins of
the towns of Harma and Mycalessus, the former was so called according
to the tradition of the people of Tanagra because the chariot of
Amphiaraus disappeared here, and not where the Thebans say it did. And
Mycalessus was so called they state because the cow that led Cadmus and
his army to Thebes lowed here.

I have described in my account of Attica how Mycalessus was
depopulated. In it near the sea is a temple of Mycalessian Demeter:
which they say is shut and opened again every night by Hercules, who
they say is one of the Idæan Dactyli. The following miracle takes place
here. At the feet of the statue of Demeter they put some of the fruits
of Autumn, and they remain fresh all the year.

At the place where the Euripus parts Eubœa from Bœotia, as you go
forward a little on the right of the temple of Mycalessian Demeter
you come to Aulis, so called they say from the daughter of Ogygus.
There is here a temple of Artemis and two stone statues of her, one
holding torches, and the other like an archer. They say that when the
Greeks in accordance with the oracle of Calchas were about to sacrifice
Iphigenia, the goddess caused a doe to be sacrificed instead. And
they keep in the temple the remains of the plane-tree which Homer has
mentioned in the Iliad.[57] It is also said that the wind at Aulis
was not favourable to the Greeks, but when at last a favourable wind
appeared then everyone sacrificed to Artemis what each had, male and
female victims, and since then it has been customary at Aulis to accept
all kinds of victims. There are shown here too the well near which the
plane-tree grows, and on a hill near the tent of Agamemnon a brazen
threshold. And some palm trees grow before the temple, the fruit of
which is not throughout good to eat as in Palestine, but they are
more mellow than the fruit of the palm-trees in Ionia. There are not
many inhabitants at Aulis, and all of them are potters. The people of
Tanagra inhabit this district, and all about Mycalessus and Harma.

[57] Iliad, ii. 307, 310.




CHAPTER XX.


In that part of the district of Tanagra near the sea is a place called
Delium, in which are statues of Artemis and Leto. And the people of
Tanagra say their founder was Pœmander, the son of Chæresilaus the son
of Iasius the son of Eleuther, who was the son of Apollo by Æthusa
the daughter of Poseidon. And Pœmander they say married Tanagra the
daughter of Æolus, though Corinna in her verses about her says that
she was the daughter of Asopus. As her life was prolonged to a very
advanced age they say that the people who lived round about called her
Graia, and in process of time called the city so too. And the name
remained so long that Homer speaks of the city by that name in his
Catalogue, in the line

    “Thespea, and Graia, and spacious Mycalessus.”[58]

But in process of time it got its old name Tanagra back again.

At Tanagra is the tomb of Orion, and the mountain Cerycius, where they
say Hermes was reared. There is also the place called Polus, where they
say Atlas sits and meditates on things under the earth and things in
heaven, of whom Homer writes,

 “Daughter of astute Atlas, who knows the depths of every sea, and who
 by himself supports the lofty pillars, which keep apart earth and
 heaven.”[59]

And in the temple of Dionysus the statue of the god by Calamis in
Parian stone is well worth looking at, but more wonderful still is a
statue of Triton. And a legend about Triton of hoar antiquity says that
the women of Tanagra before the orgies of Dionysus bathed in the sea
to purify themselves, and as they were swimming about Triton assailed
them, and they prayed Dionysus to come to their aid, and the god
hearkened to them and conquered Triton after a fight with him. Another
legend lacks the antiquity of this, but is more plausible. It relates
that, when the herds were driven to the sea, Triton lay in ambush and
carried some of them off. He also plundered small vessels, till the
people of Tanagra filled a bowl full of wine for him. And he came to it
attracted they say by its aroma, and drank of it and fell asleep and
tumbled down the rocks, and a man of Tanagra smote his head off with
an axe. And for this reason his statue has no head. And because he was
captured when drunk they think he was killed by Dionysus.

[58] Iliad, ii. 498.

[59] Odyssey, i. 52-54.




CHAPTER XXI.


I have also seen another Triton among the Curiosities at Rome, but not
so big as this one at Tanagra. This is the appearance of Tritons: the
hair on their head is like frog-wort in the marshes, and one hair is
not to be distinguished from another, the rest of their body is rough
with thin scales like the shark. Under their ears they have the gills
of a fish, and the nose of a man but a somewhat larger mouth and the
teeth of an animal. Their eyes are I think a greyish blue, and their
hands and fingers and nails are like the claws of shell-fish. And under
the breast and belly they have fins like dolphins instead of feet.
I have also seen the Ethiopian bulls, which they call rhinoceroses
because a horn projects from their nose and a little horn besides
under it, but they have no horns on their head. I have seen also the
Pæonian bulls, which are rough all over their bodies but especially in
the breast and chin. I have seen also the Indian camels which are like
leopards in colour. There is also a wild animal called the elk, which
is something between a stag and a camel, and is found among the Celts.
It is the only animal we know of that men cannot hunt or see at a
distance, but when they are engaged in hunting other animals sometimes
the deity drives the elk into their hands. But it scents men they say
at a great distance, and hides among the rocks and in the recesses of
caves. Hunters therefore, when they have drawn a large net completely
round a large district or even a mountain, so that nothing in that area
can escape, among other animals that they catch when they draw the net
tight capture occasionally the elk. But if it should not happen to be
in this area, there is no other device by which one could capture the
elk. As to the wild animal which Ctesias speaks of in his account of
the Indians, called by them _martiora_, but by the Greeks manslayer, I
am convinced this is the tiger. As to the Indian tradition, that it has
three rows of teeth in each of its jaws and stings at the end of its
tail, with which it defends itself and hurls them at a distance like
an archer his arrows, this report I cannot believe, and I think the
Indians only accept it from their excessive terror of this animal. They
are also deceived about its colour, for when it appears in the rays
of the Sun the tiger often looks red and all one colour, either from
its speed or if not running from its incessant motion, especially if
it is not seen near. I think indeed that if anyone were to travel into
the remote parts of Libya or India or Arabia, wishing to find the wild
animals that are to be found in Greece, he would not find them at all,
but he would find others different. For it is not only man that changes
his appearance in different climates and lands, but also everything
else is subject to the same conditions, for the Libyan asps have the
same colour as the Egyptian ones, while in Ethiopia the earth produces
them as black as the men. We ought therefore neither to receive any
account too hastily, nor to discredit the uncommon, for example I
myself have not seen winged serpents yet I believe there are such, for
a Phrygian brought into Ionia a scorpion that had wings like locusts.




CHAPTER XXII.


At Tanagra besides the temple of Dionysus there is one of Themis,
and another of Aphrodite, and a third of Apollo, near which are both
Artemis and Leto. With respect to the two temples of Hermes _the
Ram-carrier_ and Hermes _the Champion_, they say Hermes got the first
title because he allayed a pestilence by carrying a ram round the
walls, and that is why Calamis made a statue of Hermes carrying a ram
on his shoulders. And whoever is selected as the most handsome youth,
carries a ram on his shoulders round the walls during the festival of
Hermes. And Hermes they say was called Champion because, when the
Eretrians came with a fleet from Eubœa to Tanagra, he led the young men
out to battle, and himself (with a scraper like a young man) mainly
brought about the rout of the Eubœans. There is also some purslane
preserved in the temple of Hermes the Champion: for they fancy it was
under this tree that Hermes was reared. And at no great distance is a
theatre, and near it a portico. The people of Tanagra seem to honour
their gods most of all the Greeks, for they keep their houses and
temples apart, and their temples are in a pure place, and apart from
men. And Corinna, the only Poetess of Tanagra, has a tomb in the town
in a conspicuous place, and her painting is in the gymnasium, her head
is adorned with a fillet because of her victory over Pindar at Thebes.
And I think she conquered him because of her dialect, for she did not
compose in Doric like Pindar, but in Æolic which the Æolians would
understand, and she was also one of the handsomest of women as we can
see from her painting. They have also two kinds of cocks, game cocks
and those they call black cocks. The latter are in size like the Lydian
birds and in colour like a crow, and their gills and crest are like the
anemone, and they have small white marks on the end of their bill and
tail. Such is their appearance.

And in Bœotia on the left of the Euripus is the mountain Messapium,
and at the foot of it is the Bœotian city Anthedon on the sea, called
according to some after the Nymph Anthedon, but according to others
from Anthas who they say ruled here, the son of Poseidon by Alcyone
the daughter of Atlas. At Anthedon in about the middle of the city is
a temple and grove round it of the Cabiri, and near it is a temple
of Demeter and Proserpine and their statues in white stone. There is
also a temple of Dionysus and a statue of the god in front of the city
in the land direction. Here too are the tombs of Otus and Ephialtes
the sons of Iphimedea and Aloeus, who were slain by Apollo as both
Homer[60] and Pindar have represented. Fate carried them off in Naxos
beyond Paros, but their tombs are in Anthedon. And by the sea is a
place called the leap of Glaucus. He was a fisherman but after eating
a certain grass became a marine god and predicts the future, as is
believed by many and especially by seafaring men, who every year speak
of Glaucus’ powers of prophesy. Pindar and Æschylus have celebrated
Glaucus from these traditions of the people of Anthedon, Pindar not so
much, but Æschylus has made him the subject of one of his plays.

[60] Odyssey, xi. 318-320. Pindar, Pyth. iv. 156 _sq._




CHAPTER XXIII.


The Thebans in front of the gate Prœtis have what is called the
gymnasium of Iolaus, and a mound of earth constituting a race-course
like that at Olympia and Epidaurus. There is also shown there the
hero-chapel of Iolaus, who died in Sardinia, (as the Thebans admit),
with the Athenians and Thespians who crossed over with him. As you
leave the race-course on the right is the Hippodrome, and in it is the
tomb of Pindar. When he was quite a young man, going one day to Thespiæ
in the middle of a very hot day, he was tired and sleep came upon him.
And he lay down a little above the road, and some bees settled on him
as he slept and made their honey on his lips. This circumstance made
him first write poems. And when he was famous throughout all Greece,
the Pythian Priestess raised his fame still higher by proclaiming at
Delphi, that Pindar was to have an equal share with Apollo of the
firstfruits. It is said that he also had an appearance in a dream when
he was advanced in years. Proserpine stood by him as he slept, and told
him that she was the only one of the gods that was not celebrated by
him, but he would also celebrate her in an Ode when he came to her. And
he died before the close of the 10th day after this dream. And there
was at Thebes an old woman related to Pindar, who had been accustomed
to sing many of his Odes, to her Pindar appeared in a dream and recited
his Hymn to Proserpine. And she directly she awoke wrote it down just
as she had heard him reciting in her dream. In this Hymn Pluto has
several titles, among others the _Golden-reined_, dearly an allusion
to the Rape of Proserpine.

The road from the tomb of Pindar to Acræphnium is mostly level. They
say Acræphnium was originally a city in the district of Thebes, and I
heard that some Thebans fled for refuge there when Alexander destroyed
Thebes, for through weakness and old age they were not able to get safe
to Attica but dwelt there. This little city is situated on Mount Ptoum,
and the temple and statue of Dionysus there are well worth seeing.

About 15 stades further you come to the temple of Ptoan Apollo. Ptous
was the son of Athamas and Themisto, and from him both Apollo and the
Mountain got their name according to the poet Asius. And before the
invasion of Alexander and the Macedonians, and the destruction of
Thebes, there was an infallible oracle there. And on one occasion a
European whose name was Mys was sent by Mardonius to consult the oracle
in his own tongue, and the god gave his response not in Greek but in
the Carian dialect.[61]

When you have passed over the mountain Ptoum, you come to Larymna
a city of the Bœotians by the sea, so called from the daughter of
Cynus who was Larymna: her remote ancestors I shall relate when I
come to Locris. Formerly Larymna was reckoned in with Opus, but when
the Thebans became powerful the inhabitants voluntarily transferred
themselves to the Bœotians. There is here a temple of Dionysus, and a
statue of the god in a standing posture. And there is a deep harbour
close to the shore, and the mountains above the town afford excellent
wild boar hunting.

[61] See Herodotus, viii. 135.




CHAPTER XXIV.


As you go from Acræphnium straight for the lake Cephisis, which is
called by some Copais, is the plain called Athamantium, where they
say Athamas lived. The river Cephisus has its outlet into this lake,
which river has its rise at Lilæa in Phocis, and when you have sailed
through the lake you come to Copæ a small town on its banks, which
Homer has mentioned in his Catalogue of the ships.[62] Demeter and
Dionysus and Serapis have temples there. The Bœotians say that formerly
there were several small towns, as Athenæ and Eleusis, inhabited near
this lake, which were swept away one winter by a flood. The fish
generally in Lake Cephisis are very like other lake fish, but the eels
are especially fine and good eating.

On the left of Copæ about 12 stades further you come to Olmones, about
seven stades distant from which is Hyettus, villages both of them now
as always, and I think formerly they as well as the plain Athamantium
belonged to Orchomenus. The traditions I have heard about Hyettus the
Argive, and Olmus the son of Sisyphus, I shall relate when I come to
Orchomenus. There is nothing remarkable to be seen at Olmones, but at
Hyettus there is a temple of Hercules, where those who are sick can
obtain healing from him. The statue of the god is not artistic, but
made of rude stone as in old times.

And about 20 stades from Hyettus is the small town Cyrtones: the
ancient name was Cyrtone. It is built on a high hill, and contains a
temple and grove of Apollo, and statues of both Apollo and Artemis in a
standing picture. There is also some cold water there that flows from
the rock, and near this spring a temple of the Nymphs and small grove,
in which all kinds of trees that are planted grow.

Next to Cyrtones, after you have passed over the mountain, you come to
the little town of Corsea, and below it is a grove of wild trees mostly
holm-oaks. There is a small statue of Hermes in the grove in the open
air, about half a stade from Corsea. As you descend to the level plain
the river Platanius has its outlet into the sea, and on the right of
this river the Bœotians on the borders inhabit the town of Halæ by the
sea, which parts Locris from Eubœa.

[62] Iliad, ii. 502.




CHAPTER XXV.


At Thebes near the gate Neistis is the tomb of Menœceus the son of
Creon, who voluntarily slew himself in accordance with the oracle at
Delphi, when Polynices and his army came from Argos. A pomegranate
tree grows near this tomb, when its fruit is ripe if you break the
rind the kernel is like blood. This tree is always in bloom. And the
Thebans say the vine first grew at Thebes, but they have no proof of
what they assert. And not far from the tomb of Menœceus they say the
sons of Œdipus had a single combat and killed one another. As a record
of this combat there is a pillar, and a stone shield upon it. A place
also is shown where the Thebans say that Hera suckled Hercules when a
baby through some deceit on the part of Zeus. And the whole place is
called Antigone’s Dragging-ground: for as she could not easily lift up
with all her zeal the corpse of Polynices, her next idea was to drag it
along, which she did till she was able to throw it on the funeral pile
of Eteocles which was blazing.

When you have crossed the river called Dirce from the wife of Lycus,
(about this Dirce there is a tradition that she defamed Antiope and
was consequently killed by the sons of Antiope), there are ruins of
Pindar’s house, and a temple of the Dindymene Mother, the votive
offering of Pindar, the statue of the goddess is by the Thebans
Aristomedes and Socrates. They are wont to open this temple one day in
each year and no more. I happened to be present on that day, and I saw
the statue which is of Pentelican marble as well as the throne.

On the road from the gate Neistis is the temple of Themis and the
statue of the goddess in white stone, and next come temples of the
Fates and of Zeus Agoræus, the latter has a stone statue, but the Fates
have no statues. And at a little distance is a statue of Hercules in
the open air called _Nose-cutter-off_, because (say the Thebans) he cut
off the noses of the envoys who came from Orchomenus to demand tribute.

About 25 stades further you come to the grove of Cabirian Demeter and
Proserpine, which none may enter but the initiated. About seven stades
from this grove is the temple of the Cabiri. Who they were and what
are their rites or those of Demeter I must be pardoned by the curious
for passing over in silence. But nothing prevents my publishing to
everybody the origin of these rites according to the Theban traditions.
They say there was formerly a town here, the inhabitants of which were
called Cabiri, and that Demeter getting acquainted with Prometheus (one
of the Cabiri), and Prometheus’ son Ætnæus, put something into their
hands. What this deposit was, and the circumstances relating to it, it
is not lawful for me to disclose. But the mysteries of Demeter were a
gift to the Cabiri. But when the Epigoni led an army against Thebes and
captured it, the Cabiri were driven out by the Argives, and for some
time the mysteries were not celebrated. Afterwards however they are
said to have been reestablished by Pelarge, the daughter of Potneus,
and her husband Isthmiades, who taught them to the person whose name
was Alexiarous. And because Pelarge celebrated the mysteries beyond the
ancient boundaries, Telondes and all of the Cabiri who had left Cabiræa
returned. Pelarge in consequence of an oracle from Dodona was treated
with various honours, and a victim big with young was ordered for her
sacrifice. The wrath of the Cabiri is implacable as has frequently been
manifested. For example when some private persons at Naupactus imitated
the mysteries at Thebes, vengeance soon came upon them. And those of
Xerxes’ army who were with Mardonius and left in Bœotia, when they
entered the temple of the Cabiri (partly from the hope of finding great
wealth there, but more I think to insult the divinity), went mad and
perished by throwing themselves into the sea from the rocks. And when
Alexander after his victory put Thebes and all Thebais on fire, the
Macedonians who went into the temple of the Cabiri with hostile intent
were killed by lightning and thunderbolts. So holy was this temple from
the first.




CHAPTER XXVI.


On the right of the temple of the Cabiri is a plain called the plain
of Tenerus from Tenerus the seer, who they think was the son of Apollo
and Melia, and a large temple to Hercules surnamed Hippodetes, because
they say the Orchomenians came here with an army, and Hercules by
night took their horses and tied them to their chariots. And a little
further you come to the mountain where they say the Sphinx made her
headquarters, reciting a riddle for the ruin of those she captured.
Others say that with a naval force she used to sail the seas as a
pirate, and made her port Anthedon, and occupied this mountain for her
robberies, till Œdipus slew her after vanquishing her with a superior
force, which he brought from Corinth. It is also said that she was the
illegitimate daughter of Laius, and that her father out of good will to
her told her the oracle that was given to Cadmus at Delphi, an oracle
which no one knew but the kings of Thebes. Whenever then any one of her
brothers came to consult her about the kingdom, (for Laius had sons by
mistresses, and the oracle at Delphi only referred to his wife Epicaste
and male children by her), she used subtlety to her brothers, saying
that if they were the sons of Laius they would know the oracle given
to Cadmus, and if they could not give it she condemned them to death,
as being doubtful claimants of the blood royal. And Œdipus learnt this
oracle in a dream.

About 15 stades from this mountain are the ruins of Onchestus, where
they say Onchestus the son of Poseidon dwelt, and in my time there
was a statue of Onchestian Poseidon, and the grove which Homer has
mentioned.[63] And as you turn to the left from the temple of the
Cabiri in about 50 stades you will come to Thespia built under Mount
Helicon. The town got its name they say from Thespia the daughter
of Asopus. Others say that Thespius the son of Erechtheus came from
Athens, and gave his name to it. At Thespia is a brazen statue of
Zeus Soter: they say that, when a dragon once infested the town, Zeus
ordered one of the lads chosen by lot every year to be given to the
monster. The names of his other victims they do not record, but for
Cleostratus the last victim they say his lover Menestratus invented
the following contrivance. He made for him a brazen breastplate with
a hook on each of its plates bent in, and Cleostratus armed with this
cheerfully gave himself up to the dragon, for he knew that though
he would perish himself he would also kill the monster. From this
circumstance Zeus was called the Saviour. They have also statues of
Dionysus and Fortune, and Hygiea, and Athene the Worker, and near her
Plutus.

[63] Iliad, ii. 506.




CHAPTER XXVII.


Of the gods the Thespians have always honoured Eros most, of whom they
have a very old statue in rude stone. But who instituted the worship
of Eros at Thespia I do not know. This god is worshipped not a whit
less by the Pariani who live near the Hellespont, who were originally
from Ionia and migrated from Erythræ, and are now included amongst
the Romans. Most men think Eros the latest of the gods, and the son
of Aphrodite. But the Lycian Olen, who wrote the most ancient Hymns
of the Greeks, says in his Hymn to Ilithyia that she was the mother
of Eros. And after Olen Pamphus and Orpheus wrote verses to Eros for
the Lycomidæ to sing at the mysteries, and I have read them thanks to
a torch-bearer at the mysteries. But of these I shall make no further
mention. And Hesiod, (or whoever wrote the Theogony and foisted it
on Hesiod), wrote I know that Chaos came first, and then Earth, and
Tartarus, and Eros. And the Lesbian Sappho has sung many things about
Eros which do not harmonize with one another. Lysippus afterwards
made a brazen statue of Eros for the Thespians, and still earlier
Praxiteles made one in Pentelican marble. I have told elsewhere all
about Phryne’s ingenious trick on Praxiteles. This statue of Eros was
removed first by the Roman Emperor Gaius, and, though it was restored
by Claudius to Thespia, Nero removed it to Rome once more. And there
it was burnt by fire. But of those who acted thus impiously to the
god Gaius, always giving the same obscene word to a soldier, made him
so angry that at last he killed him for it,[64] and Nero, besides his
dealings to his mother and wedded wives, showed himself an abominable
fellow and one that had no true affinity with Eros. The statue of
Eros in Thespia in our day is by the Athenian Menodorus, who made an
imitation of the statue of Praxiteles. There are also statues in stone
by Praxiteles of Aphrodite and Phryne. And in another part of the town
is a temple of Black Aphrodite, and a theatre and market-place well
worth seeing: there is also a brazen statue of Hesiod. And not far from
the market-place is a brazen Victory, and a small temple of the Muses,
and some small stone statues in it.

There is also a temple of Hercules at Thespia, the priestess is a
perpetual virgin. The reason of this is as follows. They say that
Hercules in one night had connection with all the fifty daughters of
Thestius but one: her he spared and made her his priestess on condition
that she remained a virgin all her life. I have indeed heard another
tradition, that Hercules in the same night had connection with all the
daughters of Thestius, and that they all bare him sons, and the eldest
and youngest twins. But I cannot believe this credible that Hercules
should have been so angry with the daughter of his friend. Besides he
who, while he was among men, punished insolent persons and especially
those who showed impiety to the gods, would not have been likely to
have built a temple and appointed a priestess to himself as if he had
been a god. And indeed this temple seems to me too ancient for Hercules
the son of Amphitryon, and was perhaps erected by the Hercules who was
one of the Idæan Dactyli, temples of whom I have found among the people
of Erythræ in Ionia, and among the people of Tyre. Nor are the Bœotians
ignorant of this Hercules, for they say that the temple of Mycalessian
Demeter was entrusted to Idæan Hercules.

[64] See Sueton. _Calig._ 56, 58. The word was the word for the day
given to soldiers.




CHAPTER XXVIII.


Of all the mountains of Greece Helicon is the most fertile and full
of trees planted there: and the purslane bushes afford everywhere
excellent food for goats. And those who live at Helicon say that the
grass and roots on the mountain are by no means injurious to man.
Moreover the pastures make the venom of snakes less potent, so that
those that are bitten here mostly escape with their life, if they meet
with a Libyan of the race of the Psylli, or with some antidote from
some other source. And yet the venom of wild snakes is generally deadly
both to men and animals, and the condition of the pastures contributes
greatly to the strength of the venom, for I have heard from a Phœnician
that in the mountainous part of Phœnicia the roots make the vipers
more formidable. He said also that he had seen a man flee from the
attack of a viper and run to a tree, and the viper followed after and
blew its venom against the tree, and that killed the man. Such was
what he told me. And I also know that the following happens in Arabia
in the case of vipers that live near balsam trees. The balsam tree is
about the same size as a myrtle bush, and its leaves are like those of
the herb marjoram. And the vipers in Arabia more or less lodge under
these balsam trees, for the sap from them is the food most agreeable
to them, and moreover they rejoice in the shade of the trees. Whenever
then the proper season comes for the Arabians to gather the sap of the
balsam tree, they take with them two poles and knock them together and
so frighten off the vipers, for they don’t like to kill them as they
look upon them as sacred. But if anyone happens to be bitten by these
vipers, the wound is similar to that from steel, and there is no fear
of venom: for inasmuch as these vipers feed on the most sweet-scented
ointment, the venom changes its deadly properties for something milder.
Such is the case there.




CHAPTER XXIX.


They say that Ephialtes and Otus first sacrificed to the Muses on
Helicon, and called the mountain sacred to the Muses, and built Ascra,
of which Hegesinous speaks as follows in his poem about Attica.

 “By Ascra lay the earth-shaking Poseidon, and she as time rolled on
 bare him a son Œoclus, who first built Ascra with the sons of Aloeus,
 Ascra at the foot of many-fountained Helicon.”

This poem of Hegesinous I have not read, for it was not extant in my
time, but Callippus the Corinthian in his account of Orchomenus cites
some of the lines to corroborate his account, and similarly I myself
have cited some of them from Callippus. There is a tower at Ascra in
my time, but nothing else remains. And the sons of Aloeus thought the
Muses were three in number, and called them Melete and Mneme and Aoide.
But afterwards they say the Macedonian Pierus, who gave his name to the
mountain in Macedonia, came to Thespia and made 9 Muses, and changed
their names to the ones they now have. And this Pierus did either
because it seemed wiser, or in obedience to an oracle, or so taught
by some Thracian, for the Thracians seem in old times to have been in
other respects more clever than the Macedonians, and not so neglectful
of religion. There are some who say that Pierus had 9 daughters,
and that they had the same names as the Muses, and that those who
were called by the Greeks the sons of the Muses were called the
grandchildren of Pierus. But Mimnermus, in the Elegiac verses which he
composed about the battle of the people of Smyrna against Gyges and the
Lydians, says in his prelude that the older Muses were the daughters of
Uranus, and the younger ones the daughters of Zeus. And at Helicon, on
the left as you go to the grove of the Muses, is the fountain Aganippe.
Aganippe was they say the daughter of Termesus, the river which flows
round Helicon, and, if you go straight for the grove, you will come to
an image of Eupheme carved in stone. She is said to have been the nurse
of the Muses. And next to her is a statue of Linus, on a small rock
carved like a cavern, to whom every year they perform funeral rites
before they sacrifice to the Muses. It is said that Linus was the son
of Urania by Amphiaraus the son of Poseidon, and that he had greater
fame for musical skill than either his contemporaries or predecessors,
and that Apollo slew him because he boasted himself as equal to the
god. And on the death of Linus sorrow for him spread even to foreign
lands, so that even the Egyptians have a Lament called Linus, but in
their own dialect Maneros.[65] And the Greek poets have represented the
sorrows of Linus as a Greek legend, as Homer who in his account of the
shield of Achilles says that Hephæstus among other things represented a
harper boy singing the song of Linus.

    “And in the midst a boy on the clear lyre
    Harped charmingly, and sang of handsome Linus.”[66]

And Pamphus, who composed the most ancient Hymns for the Athenians, as
the sorrow for Linus grew to such a pitch, called him Œtolinus, (_sad
Linus_). And the Lesbian Sappho, having learnt from Pamphus this name
of Œtolinus, sings of Adonis and Œtolinus together. And the Thebans say
that Linus was buried at Thebes, and that after the fatal defeat of the
Greeks at Chæronea Philip the son of Amyntas, according to a vision he
had in a dream, removed the remains of Linus to Macedonia, and that
afterwards in consequence of another dream he sent them back to Thebes,
but they say that all the coverings of the tomb and other distinctive
marks are obliterated through lapse of time. Another tradition of the
Thebans says that there was another Linus besides this one, called
the son of Ismenius, and that Hercules when quite a boy slew him: he
was Hercules’ music-master. But neither of these Linuses composed any
poems: or if they did they have not come down to posterity.

[65] See Herodotus, ii. 79.

[66] Iliad, xviii. 569, 570.




CHAPTER XXX.


The earliest statues of the Muses here were all by Cephisodotus, and
if you advance a little you will find three of his Muses, and three by
Strongylion who was especially famous as a statuary of cows and horses,
and three by Olympiosthenes. At Helicon are also a brazen Apollo and
Hermes contending about a lyre, and a Dionysus by Lysippus, and an
upright statue of Dionysus, the votive offering of Sulla, by Myro, the
next best work to his Erechtheus at Athens. But Sulla did not offer it
of his own possessions, but took it from the Orchomenian Minyæ. This is
what is called by the Greeks worshipping the deity with other people’s
incense.[67]

Here too they have erected statues of poets and others notable
for music, as blind Thamyris handling a broken lyre, and Arion of
Methymna on the dolphin’s back. But he who made the statue of Sacadas
the Argive, not understanding Pindar’s prelude about him, has made
the piper no bigger in his body than his pipes. There too is Hesiod
sitting with a harp on his knees, not his usual appearance, for it
is plain from his poems that he used to sing with a laurel wand.
As to the period of Hesiod and Homer, though I made most diligent
research, it is not agreeable to me to venture an opinion, as I know
the disputatiousness of people, and not least of those who in my day
have discussed poetical subjects. There is also a statue of Thracian
Orpheus with Telete beside him, and there are round him representations
in stone and brass of the animals listening to his singing. The Greeks
believe many things which are not true, and among others that Orpheus
was the son of the Muse Calliope and not of the daughter of Pierus, and
that animals were led by his melody, and that he went down alive to
Hades to get back his wife Eurydice from the gods of the lower world.
But Orpheus, as it seems to me, really did excel all his predecessors
in the arrangement of his poems, and attained to great influence
as being thought to have invented the mysteries of the gods, and
purifications from unholy deeds, and cures for diseases, and means of
turning away the wrath of the gods. And they say the Thracian women
laid plots against his life, because he persuaded their husbands to
accompany him in his wanderings, but from fear of their husbands did
not carry them out at first: but afterwards when they had primed
themselves with wine carried out the atrocious deed, and since that
time it has been customary for the men to go drunk into battle. But
some say that Orpheus died from being struck with lightning by the
god because he taught men in the mysteries things they had not before
heard of. Others have recorded that, his wife Eurydice having died
before him, he went to Aornus in Thesprotia, to consult an oracle of
the dead about her, and he thought that her soul would follow him,
but losing her because he turned back to look at her he slew himself
from grief. And the Thracians say that the nightingales that build
their nests on the tomb of Orpheus sing pleasanter and louder than
other nightingales. But the Macedonians who inhabit the district of
Pieria, under the mountain and the city Dium, say that Orpheus was
slain there by the women. And as you go from Dium to the mountain and
about 20 stades further is a pillar on the right hand and on the pillar
a stone urn: this urn has the remains of Orpheus as the people of the
district say. The river Helicon flows through this district, after
a course of 75 stades it loses itself in the ground, and 22 stades
further it reappears, when it is called Baphyra instead of Helicon,
becomes a navigable stream, and finally discharges itself into the sea.
The people of Dium say that the river flowed above ground originally
throughout its course, but when the women who slew Orpheus desired to
wash off his blood in it, it went underground that it might not give
them cleansing from their blood-guiltiness. I have also heard another
account at Larissa, that a city on Olympus was once inhabited called
Libethra, where the mountain looks to Macedonia, and that the tomb of
Orpheus is not far from this city, and that there came an oracle to the
people of Libethra from Dionysus in Thrace, that when the Sun should
see the bones of Orpheus their city would be destroyed by _Sus_. But
they paid no great attention to the oracle, thinking no wild animal
would be large or strong enough to destroy their city, while as to the
boar (_Sus_) it had more boldness than power. However when the god
thought fit, then the following happened. A shepherd about mid-day
laid himself down by the tomb of Orpheus and fell asleep, and in his
sleep sang some verses of Orpheus aloud in a sweet voice. Then the
shepherds and husbandmen who were near left their respective work, and
crowded together to hear this shepherd sing in his sleep, and pushing
one another about in striving to get near the shepherd overturned the
pillar, and the urn fell off it and was broken, and the Sun did see the
remains of Orpheus. And on the following night it rained very heavily,
and the river _Sus_, which is one of the mountain streams on Olympus,
swept away the walls of Libethra, and the temples of the gods and the
houses of the inhabitants, and drowned all the human beings in the
place and all the animals. As the Libethrians therefore all perished,
the Macedonians in Dium, according to the account I received from my
host at Larissa, removed the remains of Orpheus to their city. Whoever
has investigated the subject knows that the Hymns of Orpheus are very
short, and do not altogether amount to a great number. The Lycomidæ are
acquainted with them and chant them at the Mysteries. In composition
they are second only to the Hymns of Homer, and are more valued for
their religious spirit.

[67] Compare the Homeric ἀλλοτρίων χαρίσασθαι. Od. xvii. 452. Our
_Robbing Peter to pay Paul_.




CHAPTER XXXI.


There is also at Helicon a statue of Arsinoe, whom Ptolemy married
though he was her brother. A brazen ostrich supports it. Ostriches
have wings like other birds, but from their weight and size their
wings do not enable them to fly. There is also a doe suckling Telephus
the son of Hercules, and a cow, and a statue of Priapus well worth
seeing. Priapus is honoured especially where there are flocks of sheep
or goats, or swarms of bees. And the people of Lampsacus honour him
more than all the gods, and say that he is the son of Dionysus and
Aphrodite.[68]

At Helicon there are also several tripods, the most ancient is the one
they say Hesiod received at Chalcis by the Euripus for a victory in
song. And men live round the grove, and the Thespians hold a festival
there and have games to the Muses, and also to Eros, in which they give
prizes not only for music but to athletes also. And after ascending
from this grove 20 stades you come to Hippocrene, a spring formed they
say by the horse of Bellerophon striking the earth with its hoof. And
the Bœotians that dwell about Helicon have a tradition that Hesiod
wrote nothing but _The Works and Days_, and from this they take away
the address to the Muses, and make the poem commence at the part
about Strife.[69] And they showed me some lead near Hippocrene almost
entirely rotten with age, on which _The Works and Days_ was written. A
very contrary view to this is that Hesiod has written several poems, as
that _On Women_, and _The Great Eœœ_, and _The Theogony_ and _The Poem
on Melampus_, and _The Descent of Theseus and Pirithous to Hades_, and
_The Exhortation of Chiron for the Instruction of Achilles_, and all
_The Works and Days_. The same people tell us also that Hesiod learnt
his divination from the Acarnanians, and there are some verses of his
_On Divination_ which I have read, and a _Narrative of Prodigies_.
There are also different accounts about his death. For though it is
universally agreed that Ctimenus and Antiphus, the sons of Ganyctor,
fled to Molycria from Naupactus because of the murder of Hesiod, and
were sentenced there because of their impiety to Poseidon, yet some say
that the charge against Hesiod of having violated their sister was not
true, others say he was really guilty. Such are the different accounts
about Hesiod and his Works.

On the top of Mount Helicon is a small river called the Lamus. And
in the district of Thespia is a place called Donacon, (_Reed-bed_),
where is the fountain of Narcissus, who they say looked into this
water, and not observing that it was his own shadow which he saw was
secretly enamoured of himself, and died of love near the fountain.
This is altogether silly that any grown person should be so possessed
by love as not to know the difference between a human being and a
shadow. There is another tradition about him, not so well known as the
other, _viz._ that he had a twin-sister, and that the two were almost
facsimiles in appearance and hair and dress, and used to go out hunting
together, and that Narcissus was in love with this sister, and when she
died he used to frequent this fountain and knew that it was his own
shadow which he saw, yet though he knew this it gratified his love to
think that it was not his own shadow but the image of his sister that
he was looking at. But the earth produced I think the flower narcissus
earlier than this, if one may credit the verses of Pamphus: for
though he was much earlier than the Thespian Narcissus, he says that
Proserpine the daughter of Demeter was playing and gathering flowers
when she was carried off, and that she was deceived not by violets but
by narcissuses.[70]

[68] So Tibullus calls Priapus “Bacchi rustica proles,” i. 4. 7.

[69] _viz._, at line 11.

[70] See Homer’s Hymn to Demeter, lines 8-10.




CHAPTER XXXII.


The inhabitants of Creusis, a haven of the Thespians, have no public
monuments, but in the house of a private individual is a statue of
Dionysus made of plaster and adorned by a painting. The sea-voyage from
the Peloponnese to Creusis is circuitous and rough, the promontories so
jut out into the sea that one cannot sail straight across, and at the
same time strong winds blow down from the mountains.

And as you sail from Creusis, not well out to sea but coasting along
Bœotia, you will see on the right the city Thisbe. First there is
a mountain near the sea, and when you have passed that there is a
plain and then another mountain, and at the bottom of this mountain
is Thisbe. And there is a temple of Hercules and stone statue there
in a standing posture, and they keep a festival to him. And nothing
would prevent the plain between the mountains being a lake, (so much
water is there), but that they have a strong embankment in the middle
of the plain, and annually divert the water beyond the embankment and
cultivate the dry parts of the plain. And Thisbe, from whom the city
got its name, was they say a local Nymph.

As you sail on thence you will come to a small town called Tipha near
the sea. There is a temple of Hercules there, and they have a festival
to him annually. The inhabitants say that from of old they were the
most clever mariners of all the Bœotians, and they record that Tiphys,
who was chosen the pilot of the Argo, was a townsman of theirs: they
also shew a place before their town where they say the Argo was moored
on its return from Colchi.

As you go inland from Thespia towards the mainland you will arrive at
Haliartus. But I must not separate the founder of Haliartus and Coronea
from my account of Orchomenus. On the invasion of the Medes, as the
people of Haliartus espoused the side of the Greeks, part of the army
of Xerxes set out to burn the town and district. At Haliartus is the
tomb of Lysander the Lacedæmonian, for when he attacked the city, the
forces from Thebes and Athens inside the city sallied forth, and in the
battle that ensued he fell. In some respects one may praise Lysander
very much, in others one must bitterly censure him. He exhibited
great sagacity when he was in command of the Peloponnesian fleet.
Watching when Alcibiades was absent from the fleet, he enticed his
pilot Antiochus to think he could cope with the Lacedæmonian fleet,
and when he sailed out against them boldly and confidently, defeated
him not far from the city of the Colophonians. And when Lysander
joined the fleet from Sparta the second time, he so conciliated Cyrus,
that whatever money he asked for the fleet Cyrus gave him freely at
once. And when 100 Athenian ships were anchored at Ægos-potamoi he
captured them, watching when the crews had gone on shore for fresh
water and provisions. He also exhibited his justice in the following
circumstance. Autolycus the pancratiast (whose effigy I have seen in
the Pyrtaneum at Athens) had a dispute with Eteonicus a Spartan about
some property. And when Eteonicus was convicted of pleading unfairly,
(it was when the Thirty Tyrants were in power at Athens, and Lysander
was present), he was moved to strike Autolycus, and when he struck back
he brought him to Lysander, expecting that he would decide the affair
in his favour. But Lysander condemned Eteonicus of injustice, and sent
him away with reproaches. This was creditable to Lysander, but the
following were discreditable. He put to death Philocles, the Athenian
Admiral at Ægos-potamoi, and 4000 Athenian captives, and would not
allow them burial, though the Athenians granted burial to the Medes at
Marathon, and King Xerxes to the Lacedæmonians that fell at Thermopylæ.
And Lysander brought still greater disgrace upon the Lacedæmonians by
establishing Decemvirates in the cities besides the Laconian Harmosts.
And when the Lacedæmonians did not think of making money because of
the oracle, which said that love of money alone would ruin Sparta, he
inspired in them a strong desire for money. I therefore, following the
opinion of the Persians and judging according to their law, think that
Lysander did more harm than good to the Lacedæmonians.




CHAPTER XXXIII.


At Haliartus is Lysander’s tomb, and a hero-chapel to Cecrops the son
of Pandion. And the mountain Tilphusium and the fountain Tilphusa are
about 50 stades from Haliartus. It is a tradition of the Greeks that
the Argives, who in conjunction with the sons of Polynices captured
Thebes, were taking Tiresias and the spoil to Apollo at Delphi, when
Tiresias who was thirsty drank of the fountain Tilphusa and gave up
the ghost, and was buried on the spot. They say also that Manto the
daughter of Tiresias was offered to Apollo by the Argives, but that, in
consequence of the orders of the god, she sailed to what is now Ionia,
and to that part of it called Colophonia. And there she married the
Cretan Rhacius. All the other legends about Tiresias, as the number of
years which he is recorded to have lived, and how he was changed from a
woman into a man, and how Homer in his Odyssey has represented him as
the only person of understanding in Hades,[71] all this everyone has
heard and knows. Near Haliartus too there is in the open air a temple
of the goddesses that they call Praxidicæ. In this temple they swear
no hasty oaths. This temple is near the mountain Tilphusium. There are
also temples at Haliartus, with no statues in them for there is no
roof: to whom they were erected I could not ascertain.

The river Lophis flows through the district of Haliartus. The tradition
is that the ground was dry there originally and had no water in it, and
that one of the rulers went to Delphi to inquire of the god how they
might obtain water in the district: and the Pythian Priestess enjoined
him to slay the first person he should meet on his return: and it was
his son Lophis who met him on his return, and without delay he ran
his sword through him, and Lophis yet alive ran round and round, and
wherever his blood flowed the water gushed up, and it was called Lophis
after him.

The village Alalcomenæ is not large, and lies at the foot of a mountain
not very high. It got its name from Alalcomeneus an Autochthon who they
say reared Athene: others say from Alalcomenia one of the daughters
of Ogygus. Some distance from the village in the plain is a temple
of Athene, and there was an old ivory statue of the goddess, which
was taken away by Sulla, who was also very cruel to the Athenians,
and whose manners were very unlike those of the Romans, and who acted
similarly to the Thebans and Orchomenians. He, after his furious onsets
against the Greek cities and the gods of the Greeks, was himself seized
by the most unpleasant of all diseases, for he was covered with lice,
and this was the end of all his glory. And the temple of Athene at
Alalcomenæ was neglected after the statue of the goddess was removed.
Another circumstance in my time tended to the breaking up of the
temple: some ivy, which had got a firm hold on the building, loosened
and detached the stones from their positions. The river that flows here
is a small torrent, they call it Triton because they say Athene was
brought up near the river Triton, as if it were this Triton, and not
the Triton in Libya which has its outlet from the Lake Tritonis into
the Libyan sea.

[71] Odyssey, x. 492-495.




CHAPTER XXXIV.


Before you get to Coronea from Alalcomenæ, you will come to the temple
of Itonian Athene, called so from Itonus the son of Amphictyon. Here
the Bœotians hold their general meeting. In this temple are brazen
statues of Itonian Athene and Zeus, designed by Agoracritus, a pupil
and lover of Phidias. They also erected in my time some statues of the
Graces. The following tradition is told that Iodama the priestess of
Athene went to the temple by night, and Athene appeared to her with the
head of the Gorgon Medusa on her tunic, and Iodama when she saw it was
turned into stone. In consequence of this a woman puts fire every day
on the altar of Iodama, and calls out thrice in the Bœotian dialect,
“Iodama is alive and asks for fire.”

Coronea is remarkable for its altar of Hermes Epimelius in the
market-place, and its altar of the Winds. And a little lower down is
a temple and ancient statue of Hera by Pythodorus the Theban. She has
some Sirens in her hand. For they say that they, the daughters of
Achelous, were persuaded by Hera to vie with the Muses in singing, and
that the Muses being victorious plucked off their wings and made crowns
of them. About 40 stades from Coronea is the mountain Libethrium,
where are statues of the Muses and Nymphs called Libethrides, and two
fountains (one called Libethrias, and the other Petra) like women’s
breasts, and water like milk comes up from them.

It is about 20 stades from Coronea to the mountain Laphystium, and to
the sacred enclosure of Laphystian Zeus. There is a stone statue of the
god here: and this is the spot they say where, when Athamas was going
to sacrifice Phrixus and Helle, a ram with golden wool was sent them
by Zeus, on whose back the children escaped. A little higher up is a
statue of Hercules Charops, the Bœotians say Hercules came up here from
the lower world with Cerberus. And as you descend from Laphystium to
the temple of Itonian Athene is the river Phalarus, which discharges
itself into the lake Cephisis.

Beyond the mountain Laphystium is Orchomenus, as famous and renowned
as any Greek city, which, after having risen to the very acme of
prosperity, was destined to come to a similar end as Mycenæ and Delos.
This is what they record of its ancient history. They say Andreus first
dwelt here, the son of the river Peneus, and the country was called
Andreis after him. And when Athamas came to him, he distributed to him
his land in the neighbourhood of the mountain Laphystium, and what
are now called Coronea and Haliartia. And Athamas thinking he had no
male children left, (for he had laid violent hands on Learchus and
Melicerta, and Leucon had died of some illness, and as to Phrixus he
did not know whether he was alive or had left any descendant), adopted
accordingly Haliartus and Coronus, the sons of Thersander, the son
of Sisyphus, who was brother of Athamas. But afterwards when Phrixus
returned from Colchi according to some, according to others Presbon,
Phrixus’ son by the daughter of Æetes, then the sons of Thersander
conceded the kingdom of Athamas to him and his posterity, so they
dwelt at Haliartus and Coronea which Athamas had given to them. And
before this Andreus had married Euippe the daughter of Leucon at the
instigation of Athamas, and had by her a son Eteocles, who according
to the poets was the son of the river Cephisus, so that some of them
called him Cephisiades in their poems. When Eteocles became king he
allowed the country to keep its name Andreis, but established two
tribes, one of which he called Cephisias, and the other from his own
name Eteoclea. When Almus the son of Sisyphus came to him, he granted
him a small village to dwell in, which got called after him Almones,
but eventually got changed to Olmones.




CHAPTER XXXV.


The Bœotians say that Eteocles was the first who sacrificed to the
Graces. And they are sure that he established the worship of three
Graces, though they do not remember the names he gave them. For the
Lacedæmonians say that only two Graces were appointed by Lacedæmon
the son of Taygete, and that their names were Cleta and Phaenna.
These names suit the Graces, and they have suitable names also among
the Athenians, for the Athenians honour of old the Graces Auxo and
Hegemone. As to Carpo it is not the name of a Grace but a Season.
And another Season the Athenians honour equally with Pandrosus, the
Goddess they call Thallo. But having learnt so to do from Eteocles of
Orchomenus we are accustomed now to pray to three Graces: and Angelion
and Tectæus who made a statue of Apollo at Delos have placed three
Graces in his hand; and at Athens at the entrance to the Acropolis
there are also three Graces, and near them they celebrate the mysteries
which are kept secret from the multitude. Pamphus is the first we know
of that sang the praises of the Graces, but he has neither mentioned
their number nor their names. And Homer, who has also mentioned the
Graces, says that one of them whom he calls Charis was the wife of
Hephæstus.[72] And he says that Sleep was the lover of the Grace
Pasithea. For in his account of Sleep he has written the lines,

    “That he would give me one of the younger Graces,
    Pasithea, whom I long for day and night.”[73]

Hence has arisen the idea that Homer knew of other older Graces. And
Hesiod in the Theogony (if indeed Hesiod wrote the Theogony) says that
these Graces are the daughters of Zeus and Eurynome, and that their
names are Euphrosyne and Aglaia and Thalia. Onomacritus gives the same
account of them in his verses. But Antimachus neither gives the number
of the Graces nor their names, but says they were the daughters of
Ægle and the Sun. And Hermesianax in his Elegies has written something
rather different from the opinion of those before him, _viz._ that
Peitho was one of the Graces. But whoever first represented the Graces
naked (whether in a statue or painting) I could not ascertain, for
in more ancient times the statuaries and painters represented them
dressed, as at Smyrna in the temple of the Nemeses, where above the
other statues are some golden Graces by Bupalus. In the Odeum also is
a figure of a Grace painted by Apelles. The people of Pergamus have
also, in the bed-chamber of Attalus, the Graces by Bupalus. And in
what is called the Pythium there are Graces painted by the Parian
Pythagoras. And Socrates the son of Sophroniscus at the entrance to
the Acropolis made statues of the Graces for the Athenians. And all
these are draped: but artists afterwards, I know not why, changed this
presentation of them: and in my day both sculptured them and painted
them as naked.

[72] Iliad, xviii. 382, 383.

[73] Iliad, xiv. 275, 276.




CHAPTER XXXVI.


On the death of Eteocles the succession devolved upon the posterity of
Almus. Almus had two daughters Chrysogenia and Chryse: and the story
goes that Chryse had a son by Ares called Phlegyas, who succeeded
to the kingdom when Eteocles died without any male progeny. So they
changed the name of the whole country from Andreis to Phlegyantis, and
to the city Andreis, which was very early inhabited, the king gave his
own name Phlegyas, and gathered into it the most warlike of the Greeks.
And the people of Phlegyas in their folly and audacity stood aloof as
time went on from the other Orchomenians, and attracted to themselves
the neighbouring people: and eventually led an army against Delphi to
plunder the temple, and when Philammon with some picked Argives came
against them he and they were slain in the battle that ensued. That the
people of Phlegyas more than the other Greeks delighted in war is shewn
by the lines in the Iliad about Ares and Panic the son of Ares,

 “They two armed themselves for battle with the Ephyri and the warriors
 of Phlegyas.”[74]

By the Ephyri here Homer means I think those of Thesprotia in Epirus.
But the inhabitants of Phlegyas were entirely overthrown by frequent
lightning and violent earthquakes: and the residue were carried off by
an epidemic, all but a few who escaped to Phocis.

And as Phlegyas died childless, Chryses the son of Chrysogenia (the
daughter of Almus) by Poseidon succeeded him. And he had a son Minyas,
from whom his subjects the Minyæ took the name they still keep. So
great were his revenues that he excelled all his predecessors in
wealth, and he was the first we know of that built a Treasury for the
reception of his money. The Greeks are it seems more apt to admire
things out of their own country than things in it, since several of
their notable historians have described in great detail the Pyramids
of Egypt, but have not mentioned at all the Treasury of Minyas and the
walls at Tiryns, though they are no less remarkable. The son of Minyas
was Orchomenus, and in his reign the town was called Orchomenus and
its inhabitants Orchomenians: but none the less they also continued to
be called Minyæ to distinguish them from the Orchomenians in Arcadia.
It was during the reign of this Orchomenus that Hyettus came from
Argos, fleeing after his slaying Molurus (the son of Arisbas) whom he
had caught with his wife, and Orchomenus gave him all the land now
round the village of Hyettus and the neighbouring district. Hyettus is
mentioned by the author of the Poem which the Greeks call the Great Eœæ.

“Hyettus having slain Molurus (the dear son of Arisbas) in the
chamber of his wedded wife, left his house and fled from Argos
fertile-in-horses, and went to the court of Orchomenus of Minyæ, and
the hero received him, and gave him part of his possessions in a noble
spirit.”

This Hyettus seems clearly the first that took vengeance on adultery.
And in after times Draco the Athenian legislator in the beginning of
his laws assigned a severe penalty for adultery, though he condoned
some offences. And the fame of the Minyæ reached such a height,
that Neleus, the son of Cretheus, who was king at Pylos married the
Orchomenian Chloris the daughter of Amphion the son of Iasius.

[74] Iliad, xiii. 301, 302. The reading in the former line is however a
little different.




CHAPTER XXXVII.


But the posterity of Almus was fated to come to an end, for Orchomenus
had no child, and so the kingdom devolved upon Clymenus, the son
of Presbon, the son of Phrixus. And Erginus was the eldest son of
Clymenus, and next came Stratius and Arrho and Pyleus, and the youngest
Azeus. Clymenus was slain by some Thebans at the festival of Onchestian
Poseidon, who were inflamed to anger about some trifling matter, and
was succeeded by his eldest son Erginus. And forthwith he and his
brothers collected an army and marched against Thebes, and defeated
the Thebans in an engagement, and from that time the Thebans agreed to
pay a yearly tax for the murder of Clymenus. But when Hercules grew up
at Thebes, then the Thebans had this tax remitted, and the Minyæ met
with great reverses in the war. And Erginus seeing that the citizens
were reduced to extremities made peace with Hercules, and seeking to
regain his former wealth and prosperity neglected everything else
altogether, and continued unmarried and childless till old age stole
on him unawares. But when he had amassed much money then he desired
posterity, and he went to Delphi and consulted the oracle and the
Pythian Priestess gave him the following response,

 “Erginus grandson of Presbon and son of Clymenus, you come rather late
 to inquire after offspring, but lose no time in putting a new top on
 the old plough.”

So he married a young wife according to the oracle, and became father
of Trophonius and Agamedes. Trophonius is said indeed to have been the
son of Apollo and not of Erginus, as I myself believe, and so will
everyone who consults the oracle of Trophonius. When they grew up
they say these sons of Erginus became skilful in building temples for
the gods and palaces for men: for they built the temple of Apollo at
Delphi, and the treasury for Hyrieus. In this last they contrived one
stone so that they could remove it as they liked from outside, and
they were ever filching from the treasures: and Hyrieus was astonished
when he saw keys and seals untampered with, and yet his wealth ever
diminishing. So he laid traps near the coffers in which his silver
and gold were, so that whoever entered and touched the money would be
caught. And as Agamedes entered he was trapped, and Trophonius cut off
his brother’s head, that when daylight came he might not if detected
inform against him too as privy to the robbery. Thereupon the earth
gaped and swallowed up Trophonius in the grove of Lebadea, where is a
cavity called after Agamedes, and a pillar erected near it. And the
rulers over the Orchomenians were Ascalaphus and Ialmenus, who were
reputed to be the sons of Ares by Astyoche, (the daughter of Azeus the
son of Clymenus), and who led the Minyæ to Troy.[75] The Orchomenians
also went on the expedition to Ionia with the sons of Codrus, and
after being driven from their country by the Thebans were restored to
Orchomenus by Philip the son of Amyntas. But the deity seemed ever to
reduce their power more and more.

[75] See Iliad, ii. 511-516.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.


At Orchomenus there is a temple of Dionysus, and a very ancient one of
the Graces. They worship especially some meteoric stones which they
say fell from heaven upon Eteocles, and some handsome stone statues
were offered in my time. They have also a well well worth seeing, which
they go down to to draw water. And the treasury of Minyas, a marvel
inferior to nothing in Greece or elsewhere, is constructed as follows.
It is a circular building made of stone with a top not very pointed:
the highest stone they say holds together the whole building. There
are also there the tombs of Minyas and Hesiod: they say Hesiod’s bones
were got in the following way. When a pestilence once destroyed men and
cattle they sent messengers to Delphi, and the Pythian Priestess bade
them bring the bones of Hesiod from Naupactus to Orchomenus, and that
would be a remedy. They then inquired again in what part of Naupactus
they would find those bones, and the Pythian Priestess told them that
a crow would show them. As they proceeded on their journey they saw a
stone not far from the road and a crow sitting on it, and they found
the bones of Hesiod in the hollow of the stone, and these elegiac
verses were inscribed upon it,

 “The fertile Ascra was his fatherland, but after his death the land of
 the horse-taming Minyæ got Hesiod’s remains, whose fame is greatest in
 Greece among men judged by the test of wisdom.”

As to Actæon there is a tradition at Orchomenus, that a spectre which
sat on a stone injured their land. And when they consulted the oracle
at Delphi, the god bade them bury in the ground whatever remains they
could find of Actæon: he also bade them to make a brazen copy of the
spectre and fasten it with iron to the stone. This I have myself seen,
and they annually offer funeral rites to Actæon.

About 7 stades from Orchomenus is a temple and small statue of
Hercules. Here is the source of the river Melas, which has its outlet
into the lake Cephisis. The lake covers a large part of the Orchomenian
district, and in winter time, when the South Wind generally prevails,
the water spreads over most of the country. The Thebans say that the
river Cephisus was diverted by Hercules into the Orchomenian plain,
and that it had its outlet to the sea under the mountain till Hercules
dammed that passage up. Homer indeed knows of the lake Cephisis, but
not as made by Hercules, and speaks of it in the line

 “Overhanging the lake Cephisis.”[76]

But it is improbable that the Orchomenians did not discover that
passage, and give to the Cephisus its old outlet by undoing the work
of Hercules, for they were not without money even as far back as
the Trojan War. Homer bears me out in the answer of Achilles to the
messengers of Agamemnon,

 “Not all the wealth that to Orchomenus comes,”[77]

plainly therefore at that period much wealth came to Orchomenus.

They say Aspledon lost its inhabitants from deficiency of water, and
that it got its name from Aspledon, the son of Poseidon by the Nymph
Midea. This account is confirmed by the verses which Chersias the
Orchomenian wrote,

 “Aspledon was the son of Poseidon and illustrious Midea and born in
 the large city.”

None of the verses of Chersias are now extant, but Callippus has cited
these in his speech about the Orchomenians. The Orchomenians also say
that the epitaph on Hesiod was composed by this Chersias.

[76] Iliad, v. 709.

[77] Iliad, ix. 381.




CHAPTER XXXIX.


In the mountainous parts the Phocians are nearest to the Orchomenians,
but in the plain Lebadea is nearest. Lebadea was originally built on
high ground, and called Midea from the mother of Aspledon, but when
Lebadus came from Athens and settled here the inhabitants descended to
the plain, and the town was called Lebadea after him. Who the father
of Lebadus was, and why he came there, they do not know, they only
know that his wife’s name was Laonice. The town is adorned in every
respect like the most famous Greek towns. The grove of Trophonius is
at some distance from it. They say that Hercyna was playing there with
Proserpine the daughter of Demeter, and unwittingly let a goose drop
out of her hands, which flew into a hollow cave and hid under a stone,
till Proserpine entered the cave and took it from under the stone: and
water they say burst forth where Proserpine took up the stone, and
the river was called for that reason Hercyna. And on the banks of the
river is a temple of Hercyna, and in it the effigy of a maiden with
a goose in her hands: and in the cave are the sources of the river,
and some statues in a standing posture, and there are some dragons
twined round their sceptres. One might conjecture that the statues
are Æsculapius and Hygiea, or they may be Trophonius and Hercyna,
for dragons are quite as sacred to Trophonius as to Æsculapius. And
near the river is the tomb of Arcesilaus: they say Leitus brought his
remains home from Troy. And the most notable things in the grove are a
temple of Trophonius, and statue like Æsculapius. It is by Praxiteles.
There is also a temple of Demeter called Europa, and in the open air
a statue of Zeus Hyetius. And as you ascend to the oracle, and pass
on in front of the mountain, is Proserpine’s Chase, and a temple of
Zeus the King. This temple either owing to its size or continual wars
is left unfinished; and in another temple are statues of Cronos and
Hera and Zeus. There is also a temple of Apollo. As to the oracle the
following is the process. When any one desires to descend to the cave
of Trophonius, he must first take up his residence for certain days in
the temple of the Good Deity and Good Fortune. While he stays here he
purifies himself in all other respects, and abstains from warm baths,
and bathes in the river Hercyna, and has plenty of animal food from
the various victims: for he must sacrifice to Trophonius and the sons
of Trophonius, and also to Apollo and Cronos, and to Zeus the King,
and to Hera the Chariot-driver, and to Demeter whom they call Europa,
and who they say was the nurse of Trophonius. And at each of the
sacrifices the seer comes forward and inspects the victim’s entrails,
and having done so declares whether or not Trophonius will receive with
favour the person who consults his oracle. The entrails of the other
victims however do not show the mind of Trophonius so much as those of
the ram, which each person who descends into his cave sacrifices on
the night he descends in a ditch, invoking Agamedes. And though the
former sacrifices have seemed propitious they take no account of them,
unless the entrails of this ram are favourable too, but if these are
so, then each person descends with good hope. This is the process.
The first thing they do is to bring the person who wishes to consult
the oracle by night to the river Hercyna, and to anoint him with oil,
and two citizen lads of the age of 13 whom they call Hermæ wash him,
and minister to him in all other respects. The priests do not after
that lead him immediately to the oracle, but to the sources of the
river which are very near each other. And here he must drink of the
water called Lethe, that he may forget all his former thoughts, and
afterwards he must drink of the water of Memory, and then he remembers
what he will see on his descent. And when he has beheld the statue
which they say was made by Dædalus, and which is never shown by the
priests to any but those who are going to descend to Trophonius, after
worship and prayer he goes to the oracle, clad in a linen tunic bound
with fillets, and having on his feet the shoes of the country. And the
oracle is above the grove on the mountain. And there is round it a
circular wall of stone, the circumference of which is very small, and
height rather less than two cubits. And there are some brazen pillars
and girders that connect them, and through them are doors. And inside
is a cavity in the earth, not natural, but artificial, and built with
great skill. And the shape of this cavity resembles that of an oven:
the breadth of which (measured diametrically) may be considered to be
about 4 cubits, and the depth not more than 8 cubits. There are no
steps to the bottom: but when any one descends to Trophonius, they
furnish him with a narrow and light ladder. On the descent between top
and bottom is an opening two spans broad and one high. He that descends
lies flat at the bottom of the cavity, and, having in his hands cakes
kneaded with honey, introduces into the opening first his feet and then
his knees: and then all his body is sucked in, like a rapid and large
river swallows up anyone who is sucked into its vortex. And when within
the sanctuary the future is not communicated always in the same way,
but some obtain knowledge of the future by their eyes, others by their
ears. And they return by the place where they entered feet foremost.
And they say none who descended ever died, except one of Demetrius’
body-guard, who would perform none of the accustomed routine, and who
descended not to consult the oracle, but in the hope of abstracting
some of the gold and silver from the sanctuary. They also say that his
corpse was not ejected by the usual outlet. There are indeed several
other traditions about him: I mention only the most remarkable. And on
emerging from the cavity of Trophonius, the priests take and seat the
person who has consulted the oracle on the Seat of Memory, not far from
the sanctuary, and when he is seated there they ask him what he has
seen or heard, and, when they have been informed, they hand him over
to the fit persons, who bring him back to the temple of Good Fortune
and the Good Deity, still in a state of terror and hardly knowing where
he is. Afterwards however he will think no more of it, and even laugh.
I write no mere hearsay, but from what I have seen happen to others,
and having myself consulted the oracle of Trophonius. And all on their
return from the oracle of Trophonius must write down on a tablet what
they have seen or heard. There is also still there the shield of
Aristomenes: the particulars about which I have already narrated.




CHAPTER XL.


The Bœotians became acquainted with this oracle in the following way,
knowing nothing of it before. As there had been no rain on one occasion
for two years, they sent messengers from every city to consult the
oracle at Delphi. The Pythian Priestess returned these messengers
answer that they must go to Trophonius at Lebadea, and obtain from
him a cure for this drought. But when they went to Lebadea they could
not find the oracle, when one Saon from Acræphnium, the oldest of the
messengers, saw a swarm of bees, and determined to follow them wherever
they went. He very soon saw that these bees went into the ground here,
and so he discovered the oracle. This Saon they say was also instructed
by Trophonius in all the ritual and routine of the oracle.

Of the works of Dædalus there are these two in Bœotia, the Hercules
at Thebes, and the Trophonius at Lebadea, and there are two wooden
statues in Crete, the Britomartis at Olus, and the Athene at Gnossus:
and with the Cretans also is the dancing-ground of Ariadne, mentioned
by Homer in the Iliad,[78] represented in white stone. And at Delos
there is also a wooden statue of Aphrodite not very large, injured in
the right hand from lapse of time, and instead of feet ending in a
square shape. I believe Ariadne received this from Dædalus, and when
she accompanied Theseus took the statue off with her. And the Delians
say that Theseus, when he was deprived of Ariadne by Dionysus, gave
Apollo at Delos this statue of the goddess, that he might not by taking
it home be constantly reminded of his lost love, Ariadne, and so ever
find the old wound bleed anew. Except these I know of none of the works
of Dædalus still extant: for time has effaced those works of his which
were offered by the Argives in the temple of Hera, as also those that
were brought to Gela in Sicily from Omphace.

Next to Lebadea comes Chæronea, which was in ancient times called Arne;
they say Arne was the daughter of Æolus, and another town in Thessaly
was also called after her, and it got its name Chæronea from Chæron,
who they say was the son of Apollo by Thero the daughter of Phylas. The
author of the Great Eœæ confirms me in this, in the following lines.

“Phylas married Lipephile the daughter of the famous Iolaus, who
resembled in appearance the goddesses of Olympus. She bare Hippotes in
her bower, and lovely Thero bright as the stars, who falling into the
arms of Apollo bare mighty Chæron tamer of horses.”

I think Homer knew the names Chæronea and Lebadea, but preferred to
call those towns by their ancient names, as he calls the Nile[79] by
the name Ægyptus.

There are two trophies erected at Chæronea by Sulla and the Romans,
for the victories over Taxilus and the army of Mithridates. Philip
the son of Amyntas erected no trophy either here or elsewhere for
victories whether over Greeks or barbarians, for it was not the
custom of the Macedonians to erect trophies. They have a tradition
that the Macedonian King Caranus defeated in battle Cisseus who was a
neighbouring king, and erected a trophy for his victory in imitation
of the Argives, and they say a lion came from Olympus and overturned
the trophy. Then Caranus was conscious that he had not acted wisely
in erecting a trophy, which had only a tendency to bring about an
irreconcilable enmity with his neighbours, and that neither he nor
any of his successors in the kingdom of Macedonia ought to erect
trophies after victories, if they wished to earn the goodwill of their
neighbours. I am confirmed in what I say by the fact that Alexander
erected no trophies either over Darius or for his Indian victories.

As you approach Chæronea is a common sepulchre of the Thebans that fell
in the battle against Philip. There is no inscription over them but
there is a device of a lion, which may indicate their bravery. I think
there is no inscription because, owing to the deity, their courage was
followed by no adequate success. Of all their objects of worship the
people of Chæronea venerate most the sceptre which Homer says Hephæstus
made for Zeus, which Hermes received from Zeus and gave to Pelops, and
Pelops left to Atreus, and Atreus to Thyestes, from whom Agamemnon had
it.[80] This sceptre they worship and call _the spear_. And that it
has some divine properties is shown not least by the brightness that
emanates from it. They say it was found on the borders of the Panopeans
in Phocis, and that the Phocians found gold with it; but preferred
this sceptre to the gold. I think it was taken to Phocis by Electra
the daughter of Agamemnon. It has no public temple erected for it, but
every year the priest puts it in a certain building, and there are
sacrifices to it daily, and a table is spread for it furnished with all
kinds of meats and pastry.

[78] Iliad, xviii. 590 _sq._

[79] _e.g._ Odyssey, iv. 581, xiv. 257.

[80] Iliad, ii. 100-108. Lest anybody should be surprised at a sceptre
being called _a spear_ let him remember the following words of Justin,
xliii. 5. “Per ea adhuc tempora reges hastas pro diademate
habebant, quas Græci sceptra dixere. Nam et ab origine rerum pro diis
immortalibus veteres hastas coluere, ob cujus religionis memoriam adhuc
deorum simulacris hastæ adduntur.”




CHAPTER XLI.


Of all the works indeed of Hephæstus, that poets sing of and that have
been famous among men, there is none but this sceptre of Agamemnon
certainly his. The Lycians indeed show at Patara in the temple of
Apollo a brazen bowl (which they say was by Hephæstus), the votive
offering of Telephus, but they are probably ignorant that the Samians
Theodorus and Rhœcus were the first brass-founders. And the Achæans
of Patræ say that the chest which Eurypylus brought from Troy was made
by Hephæstus, but they do not allow it to be seen. In Cyprus is the
city Amathus, where is an ancient temple of Adonis and Aphrodite, and
here they say is the necklace which was originally given to Harmonia,
but is called the necklace of Eriphyle, because she received it as a
gift from her husband, and the sons of Phegeus dedicated it at Delphi.
How they got it I have already related in my account of Arcadia. But
it was carried off by the Phocian tyrants. I do not however think that
the necklace in the temple of Adonis at Amathus is Eriphyle’s, for that
is emeralds set in gold, but the necklace given to Eriphyle is said by
Homer in the Odyssey to have been entirely gold, as in the line,

 “Who sold for gold her husband dear.”[81]

And Homer knew very well that there are different kinds of necklaces,
for in the conversation between Eumæus and Odysseus, before Telemachus
returned from Pylos and visited the swineherd’s cottage, are the
following lines,

    “Came to my father’s house a knowing man,
    With golden necklace, which was set in amber.”[82]

And among the gifts which Penelope received from the suitors he has
represented Eurymachus giving her a necklace.

    “Eurymachus brought her a splendid necklace,
    Golden and set in amber, like a sun.”[83]

But he does not speak of Eriphyle’s necklace as adorned with gold and
precious stones. So it is probable that this sceptre is the only work
of Hephæstus still extant.

Above Chæronea is a crag called Petrachos. They say that it was here
that Cronos was deceived by Rhea with a stone instead of Zeus, and
there is a small statue of Zeus on the summit of the mountain. At
Chæronea they make unguents by boiling down together lilies and roses
narcissuses and irises. These unguents relieve pain. Indeed if you
anoint wooden statues with unguent made from roses, it preserves them
from rottenness. The iris grows in marshy, places, and is in size about
as big as the lily, but is not white, and not so strong-scented as the
lily.

[81] Odyssey, xi. 327.

[82] Odyssey, xv. 459, 460.

[83] Odyssey, xviii. 295, 296.




BOOK X.--PHOCIS.




CHAPTER I.


That part of Phocis which is in the neighbourhood of Tithorea and
Delphi took its name in very ancient times from the Corinthian Phocus,
the son of Ornytion. But not many years afterwards all the country now
called Phocis got that name, after the Æginetans and Phocus the son
of Æacus crossed over there in their ships. Phocis is opposite the
Peloponnese and near Bœotia and on the sea, and has ports at Cirrha
(near Delphi) and Anticyra: the Epicnemidian Locrians prevent their
being on the sea at the Lamiac Gulf, for they dwell in that part of
Phocis, as the Scarpheans north of Elatea, and north of Hyampolis and
Abæ the people of Opus, whose harbour is Cynus.

The most eminent public transactions of the Phocians were as follows.
They took part in the war against Ilium, and fought against the
Thessalians, (before the Persians invaded Greece), when they displayed
the following prowess. At Hyampolis, at the place where they expected
the Thessalians to make their attack, they buried in the earth some
earthenware pots, just covering them over with soil, and awaited the
attack of the Thessalian cavalry: and they not knowing of the artifice
of the Phocians spurred their horses on to these pots. And some of the
horses were lamed by these pots, and some of the riders were killed
others unhorsed. And when the Thessalians more angry than before with
the Phocians gathered together a force from all their cities and
invaded Phocis, then the Phocians (in no small alarm at the various
preparations made by the Thessalians for war, and not least at the
quantity and quality of their cavalry), sent to Delphi to inquire how
they were to escape from the coming danger: and the answer of the
oracle was, “I put together in combat a mortal and immortal, and I
shall give victory to both, but the greater victory to the mortal.”
When the Phocians heard this they sent 300 picked men under Gelon
against the enemy at nightfall, bidding them watch as stealthily as
they could the movements of the Thessalians, and return to the camp by
the most out-of-the-way road, and not to fight if they could help it.
These picked men were all cut to pieces by the Thessalians together
with their leader Gelon, being ridden down by the horses, and butchered
by their riders. And their fate brought such consternation into the
camp of the Phocians, that they gathered together their women and
children and all their goods, their apparel and gold and silver and
the statues of the gods, and made a very large funeral pile, and left
thirty men in charge with strict orders if the Phocians should be
defeated in the battle, to cut the throats of the women and children,
and offer them as victims with all the property on the funeral pile,
and set light to it, and either kill one another there, or rush on the
Thessalian cavalry. Desperate resolves such as this have ever since
been called by the Greeks _Phocian Resolution_. And forthwith the
Phocians marched forth against the Thessalians, under the command of
Rhœus of Ambrosus and Daiphantes of Hyampolis, the latter in command
of the cavalry, and the former in command of the infantry. But the
commander in chief was Tellias, the seer of Elis, on whom all the hopes
of the Phocians for safety were placed. And when the engagement came
on, then the Phocians bethought them of their resolves as to their
women and children, and saw that their own safety was by no means
certain, they were consequently full of desperation, and the omens
of the god being auspicious, won one of the most famous victories of
their time. Then the oracle which was given to the Phocians by Apollo
became clear to all the Greeks, for the word given by the Thessalian
commanders was _Itonian Athene_, and the word given by the Phocian
commanders _Phocus_. In consequence of this victory the Phocians sent
to Apollo to Delphi statues of the seer Tellias and of the other
commanders in the battle, and also of the local heroes. These statues
were by Aristomedon the Argive.

The Phocians also found out another contrivance as successful as their
former one.[84] For when the enemy’s camp was pitched at the entrance
to Phocis, five hundred picked Phocians waited till the moon was at
its full, and made a night attack on the Thessalians, having smeared
themselves and likewise their armour with plaster so as to look white.
A tremendous slaughter of the Thessalians is said to have ensued, who
looked upon what they saw as a divine appearance, and not as a ruse of
the enemy.

It was Tellias of Elis who contrived this trick on the Thessalians.

[84] Reading τῶν πρότερον as _Siebelis_ suggests.




CHAPTER II.


When the army of the Persians passed into Europe, it is said that the
Phocians were obliged to join Xerxes, but they deserted the Medes and
fought on the Greek side at Platæa. Some time afterwards a fine was
imposed upon them by the Amphictyonic Council. I cannot ascertain why,
whether it was imposed upon them because they had acted unjustly in
some way, or whether it was their old enemies the Thessalians who got
this fine imposed. And as they were in a state of great despondency
about the largeness of the fine, Philomelus the son of Philotimus,
second in merit to none of the Phocians, whose native place was
Ledon one of the Phocian cities, addressed them and showed them how
impossible it was to pay the money, and urged upon them to seize the
temple at Delphi, alleging among other persuasive arguments that the
condition of Athens and Lacedæmon was favourable to this plan, and
that if the Thebans or any other nation warred against them, they
would come off victorious through their courage and expenditure of
money. The majority of the Phocians were pleased with the arguments
of Philomelus, whether the deity perverted their judgment,[85] or
that they put gain before piety. So the Phocians seized the temple at
Delphi, when Heraclides was President at Delphi, and Agathocles Archon
at Athens, in the fourth year of the 105th Olympiad, when Prorus of
Cyrene was victorious in the course. And after seizing the temple
they got together the strongest army of mercenaries in Greece, and the
Thebans, who had previously been at variance with them, openly declared
war against them. The war lasted 10 continuous years, and during that
long time frequently the Phocians and their mercenaries prevailed,
frequently the Thebans had the best of it. But in an engagement near
the town Neon the Phocians were routed, and Philomelus in his flight
threw himself down a steep and precipitous crag, and so perished: and
the Amphictyonic Council imposed the same end on all those who had
plundered the temple at Delphi. And after the death of Philomelus
the Phocians gave the command to Onomarchus, and Philip the son of
Amyntas joined the Thebans: and Philip was victorious in the battle,
and Onomarchus fled in the direction of the sea, and was there shot by
the arrows of his own soldiers, for they thought their defeat had come
about through his cowardice and inexperience in military matters. Thus
Onomarchus ended his life by the will of the deity, and the Phocians
chose his brother Phayllus as commander in chief with unlimited
power. And he had hardly been invested with this power when he saw
the following apparition in a dream. Among the votive offerings of
Apollo was an imitation in brass of an old man, with his flesh already
wasted away and his bones only left. It was said by the Delphians to
have been a votive offering given by Hippocrates the doctor. Phayllus
dreamt that he was like this old man, and forthwith a wasting disease
came upon him, and fulfilled the dream. And after the death of Phayllus
the chief power at Phocis devolved upon his son Phalæcus, but he was
deposed because he helped himself privately to the sacred money. And
he sailed over to Crete with those Phocians who joined his party, and
with a portion of the mercenaries, and besieged Cydonia, because the
inhabitants would not give him the money he demanded, and in the siege
lost most of his army and his own life.

[85] Compare the Proverb, _Quem Jupiter vult perdere dementat
prius_.




CHAPTER III.


And Philip put an end to the war, called the Phocian or the Sacred War,
in the tenth year after the plunder of the temple, when Theophilus was
Archon at Athens, in the first year of the 108th Olympiad, in which
Polycles of Cyrene won the prize in the course. And the following
Phocian towns were taken and rased to the ground, Lilæa, Hyampolis,
Anticyra, Parapotamii, Panopeus, and Daulis. These towns were
renowned in ancient times and not least in consequence of the lines
of Homer.[86] But those which the army of Xerxes burnt were rendered
thereby more famous in Greece, as Erochus, Charadra, Amphiclea, Neon,
Tithronium, and Drymæa. All the others except Elatea were obscure
prior to this war, as Trachis, Medeon, Echedamia, Ambrosus, Ledon,
Phlygonium, and Stiris. And now all those towns which I have mentioned
were rased to the ground, and except Abæ turned into villages. Abæ had
had no hand in the impiety of the other towns, and had had no share
either in the seizing of the temple or in the Sacred War. The Phocians
were also deprived of participation in the temple at Delphi and in the
general Greek Council, and the Amphictyonic Council gave their votes
to the Macedonians. As time went on however the Phocian towns were
rebuilt, and they returned to them from the villages, except to such as
had always been weak, and suffered at this time from want of money. And
the Athenians and Thebans forwarded this restoration, before the fatal
defeat of the Greeks at Chæronea, in which the Phocians took part, as
afterwards they fought against Antipater and the Macedonians at Lamia
and Crannon. They fought also against the Galati and the Celtic army
with greater bravery than any of the Greeks, to avenge the god at
Delphi, and to atone I think for their former guilt. Such are the most
memorable public transactions of the Phocians.

[86] Iliad, ii. 519-523. Cyparissus in Hom. is probably Anticyra. See
ch. 36.




CHAPTER IV.


From Chæronea it is about 20 stades to Panopeus, a town in Phocis,
if town that can be called which has no Town-Hall, no gymnasium, no
theatre, no market-place, no public fountain, and where the inhabitants
live in narrow dwellings, like mountain cottages, near a ravine. But
they have boundaries, and send members to the Phocian Council. They say
that their town got its name from the father of Epeus, and that they
were not Phocians originally, but Phlegyans who fled into Phocis from
Orchomenia. The ancient enclosure of Panopeus occupies I conjecture
about 7 stades, and I remembered the lines of Homer about Tityus, where
he called Panopeus the town delighting in the dance,[87] and in the
contest for the dead body of Patroclus he says that Schedius (the son
of Iphitus) the king of the Phocians, who was slain by Hector, dwelt
at Panopeus.[88] It appears to me that he dwelt there from fear of the
Bœotians, making Panopeus a garrison-town, for this is the point where
the Bœotians have the easiest approach to Phocis. I could not however
understand why Homer called Panopeus delighting in the dance, till I
was instructed by those who among the Athenians are called Thyiades.
These Thyiades are Athenian women who annually go to Parnassus in
concert with the Delphian women, and celebrate the orgies of Dionysus.
These Thyiades hold dances on the road from Athens and elsewhere and
also at Panopeus: and I imagine Homer’s epithet relates to this.

There is in the street of Panopeus a building of unbaked brick of no
great size, and in it a statue in Pentelican marble, which some say
is Æsculapius and others Prometheus. The last adduce the following
to confirm their opinion. Some stones lie near the ravine each large
enough to fill a cart, in colour like the clay found in ravines and
sandy torrents, and they smell very like the human body. They say
that these are remains of the clay out of which the human race was
fashioned by Prometheus. Near the ravine is also the sepulchre of
Tityus, the circumference of the mound is about the third of a stade.
Of Tityus it is said in the Odyssey,[89]

    “On the ground lying, and he lay nine roods.”

But some say that this line does not state the size of Tityus, but
that the place where he lay is called Nine Roods. But Cleon, one of
the Magnesians that live on the banks of the Hermus, said that people
are by nature incredulous of wonderful things, who have not in the
course of their lives met with strange occurrences, and that he himself
believed that Tityus and others were as large as tradition represented,
for when he was at Gades, and he and all his companions sailed from the
island according to the bidding of Hercules, on his return he saw a sea
monster who had been washed ashore, who had been struck by lightning
and was blazing, and he covered five roods. So at least he said.

About seven stades distant from Panopeus is Daulis.[90] The people here
are not numerous, but for size and strength they are still the most
famous of the Phocians. The town they say got its name from the nymph
Daulis, who was the daughter of Cephisus. Others say that the site of
the town was once full of trees, and that the ancients gave the name
_daula_ to anything dense. Hence Æschylus calls the beard of Glaucus
(the son of Anthedonius) _daulus_. It was here at Daulis according to
tradition that the women served up his son to Tereus, and this was the
first recorded instance of cannibalism among mankind. And the hoopoe,
into which tradition says Tereus was changed, is in size little bigger
than a quail, and has on its head feathers which resemble a crest. And
it is a remarkable circumstance that in this neighbourhood swallows
neither breed nor lay eggs, nor build nests in the roofs of houses:
and the Phocians say that when Philomela became a bird she was in
dread both of Tereus and his country. And at Daulis there is a temple
and ancient statue of Athene, and a still older wooden statue which
they say Procne brought from Athens. There is also in the district of
Daulis a place called Tronis, where a hero-chapel was built to their
hero-founder, who some say was Xanthippus, who won great fame in war,
others Phocus (the son of Ornytion and grandson of Sisyphus). They
honour this hero whoever he is every day, and when the Phocians bring
the victims they pour the blood through a hole on to his tomb, and
consume the flesh there also.

[87] Odyssey, xi. 581.

[88] Iliad, xvii. 306, 307.

[89] xi. 577.

[90] There is probably some mistake in the text here, for instead of
_seven_ stades Dodwell thought the distance _twenty-seven_, and Gell
_thirty-seven_ or _forty-seven_.




CHAPTER V.


There is also an ascent by Daulis to the heights of Parnassus, rather
longer than the ascent from Delphi but not so steep. As you turn from
Daulis on to the high road for Delphi and go forward, you will come
to a building on the left of the road called Phocicum, into which the
Phocians assemble from each of their towns. It is a large building,
and in it are pillars all the length of the building, and galleries on
each side, where the Phocians sit in assembly. But at the end of the
building there are neither pillars nor galleries, but statues of Zeus
and Athene and Hera, Zeus on his throne, and Hera standing by on the
right, Athene on the left.

As you go on from thence you will come to the Cross-roads, where
they say Œdipus murdered his father.[91] There are records indeed of
the woes of Œdipus in all parts of Greece. So it seems it was fated.
For directly he was born they pierced his ankles, and exposed him on
Mount Cithæron in Platæa. He was brought up at Corinth and the country
near the Isthmus. And Phocis and the Cross-roads here were polluted
by his father’s blood. Thebes has attained even more celebrity from
the marriage of Œdipus and the injustice of Eteocles. To Œdipus the
Cross-roads here and his bloody deed there caused all his subsequent
woes, and the tombs of Laius and his attendant are in the very middle
of the place where the 3 roads meet, and there are unhewn stones
heaped up on them. They say that Damasistratus, who was king of Platæa,
came across their corpses and buried them.

The high-road from here to Delphi is very steep, and rather difficult
even for a well-equipped traveller. Many varying legends are told
about Delphi, and still more about the oracle of Apollo. For they say
that in the most ancient times it was the oracle of Earth, and that
Earth appointed as priestess of her oracle Daphnis, who was one of the
Mountain Nymphs. And the Greeks have a poem called Eumolpia, the author
of which was they say Musæus the son of Antiophemus. In this poem
Delphi is represented as a joint oracle of Poseidon and Earth, and we
read that Earth delivered her own oracles, but Poseidon employed Pyrcon
as his interpreter. These are the lines:

    “Forthwith Earth uttered forth oracular wisdom,
    And with her Pyrcon, famed Poseidon’s priest.”

But afterwards they say Earth gave her share to Themis, and Apollo
received it from Themis: and he they say gave Poseidon for his share in
the oracle Calauria near Trœzen. I have also heard of some shepherds
meeting with the oracle, and becoming inspired by the vapour, and
prophesying through Apollo. But the greatest and most widespread fame
attaches to Phemonoe, who was the first priestess of Apollo, and the
first who recited the oracles in hexameters. But Bœo, a Phocian woman
who composed a Hymn for Delphi, says that the oracle was set up to the
god by Olen and some others that came from the Hyperboreans, and that
Olen was the first who delivered oracles and in hexameters. Bœo has
written the following lines,

 “Here Pegasus and divine Aguieus, sons of the Hyperboreans, raised to
 thy memory an oracle.”

And enumerating other Hyperboreans she mentions at the end of her Hymn
Olen,

    “And Olen who was Phœbus’ first prophet,
    And first to put in verse the ancient oracles.”

Tradition however makes women the first utterers of the oracles.

The most ancient temple of Apollo was they say built of laurel, from
branches brought from a tree at Tempe. So that temple would resemble a
hut. And the people of Delphi say the next temple was built of the wax
and wings of bees, and was sent by Apollo to the Hyperboreans. There
is also another tradition that this temple was built by a Delphian
whose name was Pteras, that it got its name from its builder, from whom
also a Cretan city by the addition of one letter got called Apteræi.
For as to the tradition about the fern (_Pteris_) that grows on
mountains, that they made the temple of this while it was still green,
this I cannot accept. As to the third temple that it was of brass is
no marvel since Acrisius made a brazen chamber for his daughter, and
the Lacedæmonians have still a temple of Athene Chalciœcus,[92] and
the Romans have a forum remarkable for its size and magnificence with
a brazen roof. So that the temple of Apollo should be brazen is not
improbable. In other respects however I do not accept the legend about
the temple being by Hephæstus, or about the golden songsters that
Pindar sang of in reference to that temple,

    “Some golden Charmers sang above the gable.”

I think Pindar wrote this in imitation of Homer’s Sirens.[93] Moreover
I found varying accounts about the destruction of this temple, for
some say it was destroyed by a landslip, others by fire. And the
fourth (built of stone by Trophonius and Agamedes) was burnt down
when Erxiclides was Archon at Athens, in the first year of the 58th
Olympiad, when Diognetus of Croton was victor. And the temple which
still exists was built by the Amphictyones out of the sacred money, and
its architect was the Corinthian Spintharus.

[91] See Sophocles, _Œdipus Tyrannus_, 733, 734. What I translate
in this Paragraph “Cross-roads” would be literally “the road called
Cleft,” which an English reader would hardly understand.

[92] That is, “_Athene of the Brazen House_.”

[93] See Odyssey, xii. 39 _sq._




CHAPTER VI.


They say the most ancient town here was built by Parnassus, who was
they say the son of the Nymph Cleodora, and his fathers, (for those
called heroes had always two fathers, one a god, one a man), were they
say Poseidon among the gods and Cleopompus among men. They say Mount
Parnassus and the dell Parnassus got their names from him, and that
omens from the flight of birds were discovered by him. The town built
by him was they say destroyed in Deucalion’s flood, and all the human
beings that escaped the flood followed wolves and other wild beasts
to the top of Mount Parnassus, and from this circumstance called the
town which they built Lycorea (_Wolf-town_). There is also a different
tradition to this, which makes Lycorus the son of Apollo by the Nymph
Corycia, and that Lycorea was called after him, and the Corycian cavern
from the Nymph. Another tradition is that Celæno was the daughter of
Hyamus the son of Lycorus, and that Delphus from whom Delphi got its
name was the son of Celæno (the daughter of Hyamus) by Apollo. Others
say that Castalius an Autochthon had a daughter Thyia, who was the
first priestess of Dionysus and introduced his orgies, and that it
was from her that females inspired by Dionysus got generally called
Thyiades, and they think Delphus was the son of Apollo and this Thyia.
But some say his mother was Melæne the daughter of Cephisus. And in
course of time the inhabitants called the town Pytho as well as Delphi,
as Homer has shown in his Catalogue of the Phocians. Those who wish
to make genealogies about everything think that Pythes was the son
of Delphus, and that the town got called Pytho after him when he was
king. But the prevalent tradition is that the dragon slain by Apollo’s
arrows rotted here, and that was why the town was called Pytho from
the old Greek word to rot, which Homer has employed in his account
of the island of the Sirens being full of bones, because those that
listened to their song rotted away.[94] The dragon that was slain by
Apollo was the poets say posted there by Earth to guard her oracle. It
is also said that Crius, the king of Eubœa, had a son of an insolent
disposition, who plundered the temple of the god, and the houses of
the wealthy men. And when he was going to do this a second time, then
the Delphians begged Apollo to shield them from the coming danger, and
Phemonoe (who was then priestess) gave them the following oracle in
hexameters, “Soon will Phœbus send his heavy arrow against the man who
devours Parnassus, and the Cretans shall purify Phœbus from the blood,
and his fame shall never die.”

[94] Odyssey, xii. 46.




CHAPTER VII.


It appears that the temple at Delphi was plundered from the beginning.
For this Eubœan robber, and a few years later the people of Phlegyas,
and Pyrrhus the son of Achilles also, all laid their hands on it,
and part of Xerxes’ army, but those who enriched themselves most and
longest on the treasures of the god were the Phocian authorities and
the army of the Galati. And last of all it was fated to experience
Nero’s contempt of everything, for he carried off from Apollo 500
brazen statues, some of gods some of men.

The most ancient contest, and one for which they gave a prize first,
was they say singing a Hymn in honour of Apollo. And the first victor
was Chrysothemis the Cretan, whose father Carmanor is said to have
purified Apollo. And after Chrysothemis they say Philammon was next
victor, and next to him his son Thamyris. Neither Orpheus they say
from his solemn position in respect to the mysteries and his general
elevation of soul, nor Musæus from his imitation of Orpheus in all
things, cared to contend in this musical contest. They say also that
Eleuther carried off the Pythian prize for his loud and sweet voice. It
is said also that Hesiod was not permitted to be a competitor, because
he had not learned to accompany his voice with the harp. Homer too went
to Delphi to enquire what was necessary for him, and even had he learnt
how to play on the harp, the knowledge would have been useless to him,
because of his being blind. And in the third year of the 48th Olympiad,
in which Glaucias of Croton was victor, the Amphictyones established
prizes for harping as at the first, and added contests for pipes, and
for singing to the pipes. And the victors proclaimed were Cephallen who
was distinguished in singing to the harp, and the Arcadian Echembrotus
for his singing to the pipes, and the Argive Sacadas for his playing on
the pipes. Sacadas also had two other Pythian victories after this.
Then too they first ordained prizes for athletes as at Olympia, with
the exception of the fourhorse races, and they established by law the
long course and double course for boys. And in the second Pythiad they
invited them no longer to contend for prizes, but made the contest one
for a crown only, and stopped singing to the pipes, as not thinking
it pleasing to the ear. For singing to the pipes was most gloomy kind
of music, and elegies and dirges were so sung. The votive offering
of Echembrotus confirms me in what I say, for the brazen tripod
offered by him to Hercules at Thebes has the following inscription,
“Echembrotus the Arcadian offered this tripod to Hercules, after having
been victorious in the contests of the Amphictyones, and in singing to
the Greeks songs and elegies.” So the contest of singing to the pipes
was stopped. Afterwards they added a chariot race, and Clisthenes the
tyrant of Sicyon was proclaimed victor. And in the eighth Pythiad they
added harping without the accompaniment of the voice, and Agelaus
from Tegea got the crown. And in the 23rd Pythiad they had a race in
armour, and Timænetus from Phlius got the laurel, five Olympiads after
Damaretus of Heræa was victor. And in the 48th Pythiad they established
the race for a pair-horse chariot, and the pair of Execestides the
Phocian was victorious. And in the fifth Pythiad after this they yoked
colts to chariots, and the four-colt car of Orphondas the Theban came
in first. But the pancratium for boys, and the pair of colts, and the
racing colt they instituted many years after the people of Elis, the
pancratium in the 61st Pythiad (when Iolaidas the Theban was victor),
and one Pythiad after the racing colt (when Lycormas of Larissa was
proclaimed victor), and in the 69th Pythiad the pair of colts (when
the Macedonian Ptolemy was victor). For the Ptolemies delighted to be
called Macedonians, as indeed they were. And the crown of laurel was
given to the victors in the Pythian games, for no other reason I think
than that (according to the prevalent report) Apollo was enamoured of
Daphne[95] the daughter of Ladon.

[95] Daphne means laurel. See Wordsworth’s noble Poem, _The Russian
Fugitive_, Part iii.




CHAPTER VIII.


Some think that Amphictyon the son of Deucalion appointed the general
Council of the Greeks, and that was why those who assembled at the
Council were called Amphictyones: but Androtion in his history
of Attica says that originally delegates came to Delphi from the
neighbouring people who were called Amphictiones, and in process
of time the name Amphictyones prevailed. They say too that the
following Greek States attended this general Council, the Ionians, the
Dolopes, the Thessalians, the Ænianes, the Magnetes, the Malienses,
the Phthiotes, the Dorians, the Phocians, the Locrians who dwelt
under Mount Cnemis and bordered upon Phocis. But when the Phocians
seized the temple, and ten years afterwards the Sacred War came to
an end, the Amphictyonic Council was changed: for the Macedonians
obtained admission to it, and the Phocians and (of the Dorians) the
Lacedæmonians ceased to belong to it, the Phocians because of their
sacrilegious outbreak on the temple, and the Lacedæmonians because they
had assisted the Phocians. But when Brennus led the Galati against
Delphi, the Phocians exhibited greater bravery than any of the Greeks
in the war, and were in consequence restored to the Amphictyonic
Council, and in other respects regained their former position. And
the Emperor Augustus wished that the inhabitants of Nicopolis near
Actium should belong to the Amphictyonic Council, so he joined the
Magnetes and Malienses and Ænianes and Phthiotes to the Thessalians,
and transferred their votes, and those of the Dolopes who had died
out, to the people of Nicopolis. And in my time the Amphictyones were
30 members. Six came from Nicopolis, six from Macedonia, six from
Thessaly, two from the Bœotians (who were originally in Thessaly and
called Æolians), two from Phocis, and two from Delphi, one from ancient
Doris, one from the Locrians called Ozolæ, one from the Locrians
opposite Eubœa, one from Eubœa, one from Argos Sicyon Corinth and
Megara, and one from Athens. Athens and Delphi and Nicopolis send
delegates to every Amphictyonic Council: but the other cities I have
mentioned only join the Amphictyonic Council at certain times.

As you enter Delphi there are four temples in a row, the first in
ruins, the next without statues or effigies, the third has effigies of
a few of the Roman Emperors, the fourth is called the temple of Athene
Pronoia. And the statue in the ante-chapel is the votive offering of
the Massaliotes, and is larger in size than the statue within the
temple. The Massaliotes are colonists of the Phocæans in Ionia, and
were part of those who formerly fled from Phocæa from Harpagus the
Mede, but, after having beaten the Carthaginians in a naval engagement,
obtained the land which they now occupy, and rose to great prosperity.
This votive offering of the Massaliotes is of brass. The golden shield
which was offered to Athene Pronoia by Crœsus the Lydian was taken away
(the Delphians said) by Philomelus. Near this temple is the sacred
enclosure of the hero Phylacus, who, according to the tradition of the
Delphians, protected them against the invasion of the Persians. In the
part of the gymnasium which is in the open air was once they say a wild
wood where Odysseus, when he went to Autolycus and hunted with the sons
of Autolycus, was wounded on the knee by a boar.[96] As you turn to the
left from the gymnasium, and descend I should say about 3 stades, is
the river called Plistus, which falls into the sea at Cirrha the haven
of the Delphians. And as you ascend from the gymnasium to the temple
on the right of the road is the water Castalia which is good to drink.
Some say it got its name from Castalia a local woman, others say from
a man called Castalius. But Panyasis, the son of Polyarchus, in the
poem he wrote about Hercules says that Castalia was the daughter of
Achelous. For he says about Hercules,

 “Crossing with rapid feet snow-crown’d Parnassus he came to the
 immortal fountain of Castalia, the daughter of Achelous.”

I have also heard that the water of Castalia is a gift of the river
Cephisus. Alcæus indeed so represents it in his Prelude to Apollo, and
his statement is confirmed by the people of Lilæa, who believe that the
local cakes and other things, which they throw into the Cephisus on
certain stated days, reappear in the Castalia.

[96] Odyssey, xix. 428-451.




CHAPTER IX.


Delphi is everywhere hilly, the sacred precincts of Apollo and other
parts of the town alike. The sacred precincts are very large and in the
upper part of the town, and have several entrances. I will enumerate
all the votive offerings that are best worthy of mention. The athletes
however, and musical competitors, of no great merit I do not think
worthy of attention, and notable athletes I have already described in
my account of Elis. At Delphi then there is a statue of Phayllus of
Croton, who had no victory at Olympia, but was twice victor in the
pentathlum and once in the course in the Pythian games, and fought a
naval engagement against the Medes, having furnished a ship himself,
and manned it with some people of Croton who were sojourners in
Greece. So much for Phayllus of Croton. On the entrance to the sacred
enclosure is a bull in brass by Theopropus the Æginetan, the votive
offering of the Corcyræans. The tradition is that a bull in Corcyra
left the herd and pasture, and used to resort to the sea bellowing
as he went; and as this happened every day the herdsman went down to
the sea, and beheld a large shoal of tunny fish. And he informed the
people of Corcyra, and they, as they had great difficulty in catching
these tunnies much as they wished, sent messengers to Delphi. And then
in obedience to the oracle they sacrificed the bull to Poseidon, and
after this sacrifice caught the fish, and offered both at Olympia and
Delphi the tenth of their catch. And next are the votive offerings
of the people of Tegea from the spoils of the Lacedæmonians, an
Apollo and Victory, and some local heroes; as Callisto the daughter
of Lycaon, and Arcas who gave his name to Arcadia, and the sons of
Arcas, Elatus and Aphidas and Azan; and besides them Triphylus,
(whose mother was not Erato but Laodamia, the daughter of Amyclas
king at Lacedæmon), and also Erasus the son of Triphylus. As to the
artificers of these statues, Pausanias of Apollonia made the Apollo
and Callisto, and the Victory and effigy of Arcas were by Dædalus of
Sicyon, Triphylus and Azan were by the Arcadian Samolas, and Elatus
and Aphidas and Erasus were by the Argive Antiphanes. All these the
people of Tegea sent to Delphi after the capture of the Lacedæmonians
who invaded them. And opposite them are the votive offerings of the
Lacedæmonians when they vanquished the Athenians, statues of Castor
and Pollux and Zeus and Apollo and Artemis, and besides them Poseidon
crowning Lysander the son of Aristocritus, and Abas who was Lysander’s
prophet, and Hermon the pilot of Lysander’s flag-ship. This statue
of Hermon was designed by Theocosmus the Megarian, as the Megarians
ranked Hermon among their citizens. And Castor and Pollux are by the
Argive Antiphanes, and Abas is by Pison from Calauria near Trœzen,
and Artemis and Poseidon and Lysander are by Dameas, and Apollo and
Zeus by Athenodorus. Both Dameas and Athenodorus were Arcadians from
Clitor. And behind the statues we have just mentioned are those of
the Spartans or their allies who fought for Lysander at the battle of
Ægos-potamoi, as Aracus the Lacedæmonian, and Erianthes the Bœotian
beyond Mimas, and then Astycrates, and the Chians Cephisocles and
Hermophantus and Hicesius, and the Rhodians Timarchus and Diagoras, and
the Cnidian Theodamus, and the Ephesian Cimmerius, and the Milesian
Æantides. All these were by Tisander. The following were by Alypus of
Sicyon, Theopompus from Myndus, and Cleomedes of Samos, and from Eubœa
Aristocles of Carystus and Autonomus of Eretria, and Aristophantus
of Corinth, and Apollodorus of Trœzen, and from Epidaurus in Argolis
Dion. And next to these are the Achæan Axionicus from Pellene, and
Theares from Hermion, and Pyrrhias from Phocis, and Comon from Megara,
and Agasimenes from Sicyon, and Telycrates from Leucas, and Pythodotus
from Corinth, and Euantidas from Ambracia, and lastly the Lacedæmonians
Epicyridas and Eteonicus. All these are they say by Patrocles and
Canachus. The reverse that the Athenians sustained at Ægos-potamoi they
maintain befell them through foul play, for their Admirals Tydeus and
Adimantus were they say bribed by Lysander. And in proof of this they
bring forward the following Sibylline oracle. “Then shall Zeus the
lofty-thunderer, whose strength is almighty, lay grievous woes on the
Athenians, fierce battle for their ships of war, that shall perish
through the treachery and villainy of their commanders.” They also cite
these other lines from the oracles of Musæus, “Verily a fierce storm
is coming on the Athenians through the villainy of their commanders,
but there shall be some comfort, they shall level low the state that
inflicted this disaster, and exact vengeance.” So much for this affair.
And as for the engagement between the Lacedæmonians and Argives beyond
Thyrea, the Sibyl foretold that it would be a drawn battle, but the
Argives thinking they had got the best of it in the action sent to
Delphi as a votive offering a brazen horse by Antiphanes of Argos,
doubtless an imitation of the Trojan Horse.




CHAPTER X.


On the basement under this horse is an inscription, which states that
the following statues were dedicated from the tenth of the spoils of
Marathon. These statues are Athene and Apollo, and of the commanders
Miltiades, and of those called heroes Erechtheus and Cecrops and
Pandion, and Leos, and Antiochus the son of Hercules by Meda the
daughter of Phylas, and Ægeus, and of the sons of Theseus Acamas.
These, in accordance with an oracle from Delphi, gave names to the
Athenian tribes. Here too are Codrus the son of Melanthus, and Theseus,
and Phyleus, who are no longer ranked among the Eponymi. All these that
I have mentioned are by Phidias, and these too are really the tenth
of the spoils of Marathon. But the statues of Antigonus, and his son
Demetrius, and the Egyptian Ptolemy, were sent to Delphi later, Ptolemy
through goodwill, but the Macedonians through fear.

And near this horse are other votive offerings of the Argives, statues
of those associated with Polynices in the expedition against Thebes,
as Adrastus the son of Talaus, and Tydeus the son of Œneus, and the
descendants of Prœtus, (Capaneus the son of Hipponous, and Eteoclus
the son of Iphis), and Polynices, and Hippomedon (Adrastus’ sister’s
son), and near them the chariot of Amphiaraus and in it Baton, the
charioteer and also kinsman of Amphiaraus, and lastly Alitherses. These
are by Hypatodorus and Aristogiton, and were made, so the Argives
themselves say, out of the spoils of the victory which they and their
Athenian allies obtained at Œnoe in Argolis. It was after the same
action, I think, that the Argives erected the statues of the Epigoni.
They are here at any rate, as Sthenelus and Alcmæon, who was, I
take it, honoured above Amphilochus in consequence of his age, and
Promachus, and Thersander, and Ægialeus, and Diomede, and between the
two last Euryalus. And opposite these are some other statues, dedicated
by the Argives who assisted Epaminondas and the Thebans in restoring
the Messenians. There are also effigies of heroes, as Danaus the most
powerful king at Argos, and Hypermnestra the only one of her sisters
with hands unstained by murder, and near her Lynceus, and all those
that trace their descent from Hercules, or go back even further to
Perseus.

There are also the horses of the Tarentines in brass, and captive women
of the Messapians (barbarians near Tarentum), by Ageladas the Argive.
The Lacedæmonians colonized Tarentum under the Spartan Phalanthus, who,
when he started on this colony, was told by an oracle from Delphi that
he was to acquire land and found a city where he saw rain from a clear
sky. At first he paid no great heed to this oracle, and sailed to Italy
without consulting any interpreters, but when, after victories over
the barbarians, he was unable to capture any of their cities, or get
possession of any of their land, he recollected the oracle, and thought
the god had prophesied impossibilities: for it could not rain he
thought from a clear and bright sky. And his wife, who had accompanied
him from home, endeavoured to comfort him in various ways, as he was
in rather a despondent condition, and laid his head on her knees, and
began to pick out the lice, and in her goodwill it so fell out that she
wept when she thought how her husband’s affairs made no good progress.
And she shed tears freely on Phalanthus’ head, and then he understood
the oracle, for his wife’s name was Æthra (_clear sky_), and so on the
following night he took from the barbarians Tarentum, the greatest and
most prosperous of their maritime cities. They say the hero Taras was
the son of Poseidon and a local Nymph, and both the city and river got
their name from him.




CHAPTER XI.


And near the votive offering of the Tarentines is the treasury of the
Sicyonians, but you will see no money either here or in any of the
treasuries. The Cnidians also brought statues to Delphi, as Triopas
(their founder) standing by a horse, and Leto and Apollo and Artemis
shooting at Tityus, who is represented wounded. These statues stand by
the treasury of the Sicyonians.

The Siphnii too made a treasury for the following reason. The island
of Siphnos had gold mines, and the god bade them send a tenth of the
revenue thus accruing to Delphi, and they built a treasury and sent
the tenth to the god. But when in their cupidity they left off this
tribute, then the sea encroached and swept away their mines. Statues
after a naval victory over the Tyrrhenians were also erected by the
people of Lipara, who were a colony of Cnidians, and the leader of the
colony was they say a Cnidian whose name was Pentathlus, as Antiochus
the Syracusan (the son of Xenophanes) testifies in his History of
Sicily. He says also that when they had built a town at Pachynus, a
promontory in Sicily, they were expelled from it by force by the Elymi
and Phœnicians, and either occupied deserted islands, or drove out the
islanders from those islands which they call to this day by the name
Homer employs, the islands of Æolus. Of these they lived in Lipara and
built a city there, and used to sail to Hiera and Strongyle and Didymæ
for purposes of cultivation. In Strongyle fire clearly ascends from the
ground, and in Hiera fire spontaneously blazes up on a height in the
island, and near the sea are convenient baths, if the water is not too
hot, for often it is difficult to bathe by reason of the great heat.

The Theban treasuries were the result of the victory at Leuctra, and
the Athenian treasuries from the victory at Marathon and the spoil
of Datis on that occasion: but whether the Cnidians built theirs to
commemorate some victory or to display their wealth I do not know. But
the people of Cleonæ suffered greatly like the Athenians from a plague,
till in obedience to the oracle at Delphi they sacrificed a goat to the
rising sun, and, as they thus obtained deliverance from their plague,
they sent a brazen goat to Apollo. And the treasury of the Syracusans
was the result of the great reverses of Athens, and the Potidæan
treasury was erected out of piety to the god.

The Athenians also built a portico with the money which they got in war
from the Peloponnesians and their Greek allies. There are also votive
offerings of the figure-heads of captured ships and brazen shields. The
inscription on these mentions the cities from which the Athenians sent
the firstfruits of their spoil, Elis, and Lacedæmon, and Sicyon, and
Megara, and Pellene in Achaia, and Ambracia, and Leucas, and Corinth
itself. In consequence of these naval victories they sacrifice to
Theseus, and to Poseidon at the promontory of Rhium. I think also the
inscription refers to Phormio the son of Asopichus, and to his famous
deeds.




CHAPTER XII.


There is a projecting stone above, on which the Delphians say the first
Herophile, also called the Sibyl, chanted her oracles.[97] I found her
to be most ancient, and the Greeks say she was the daughter of Zeus
by Lamia the daughter of Poseidon, and that she was the first woman
who chanted oracles, and that she was called Sibyl by the Libyans. The
second Herophile was younger than her, but was herself clearly earlier
than the Trojan War, for she foretold in her oracles that Helen would
be reared in Sparta to the ruin of Asia Minor and Europe, and that
Ilium would be taken by the Greeks owing to her. The Delians make
mention of her Hymn to Apollo. And she calls herself in her verses not
only Herophile but also Artemis, and says she was Apollo’s wedded wife
and sister and daughter. This she must have written when possessed by
the god. And elsewhere in her oracles she says her father was a mortal
but her mother one of the Nymphs of Mount Ida. Here are her lines,

 “I was the child of a mortal sire and goddess mother, she was a Nymph
 and Immortal while he eat bread. By my mother I am connected with
 Mount Ida, and my native place is red Marpessus (sacred to my mother),
 and the river Aidoneus.”

There are still in Trojan Ida ruins of Marpessus, and a population of
about 60 inhabitants. The soil all about Marpessus is red and terribly
dry. Why in fact the river Aidoneus soaks into the earth, and on its
emerging sinks into the ground again, and is eventually altogether lost
in it, is I think the thin and porous soil of Mount Ida. Marpessus
is 240 stades distant from Alexandria in the Troad. The inhabitants
of Alexandria say that Herophile was the Sacristan of Sminthian
Apollo, and that she foretold by dream to Hecuba what we know really
came about. This Sibyl lived most of her life at Samos, but visited
Clarus in Colophonia, Delos, and Delphi, and wherever she went chanted
standing on the stone we have already mentioned. Death came upon her
in the Troad, her tomb is in the grove of Sminthian Apollo, and the
inscription on the pillar is as follows.

“Here hidden by stone sepulchre I lie, Apollo’s fate-pronouncing
Sibyl I, a vocal maiden once but now for ever dumb, here placed by
all-powerful fate, and I lie near the Nymphs and Hermes, in this part
of Apollo’s realm.”

Near her tomb is a square Hermes in stone, and on the left is water
running into a conduit, and some statues of the Nymphs. The people of
Erythræ, who are most zealous of all the Greeks in claiming Herophile
as theirs, show the mountain called Corycus and the cavern in it in
which they say Herophile was born, and they say that she was the
daughter of Theodorus (a local shepherd) and a Nymph, and that she
was called Idæa for no other reason than that well-wooded places were
called by people at that time _Idas_. And the line about Marpessus and
the river Aidoneus they do not include in the oracles.

Hyperochus, a native of Cumæ, has recorded that a woman called Demo,
of Cumæ in the Opican district, delivered oracles after Herophile and
in a similar manner. The people of Cumæ do not produce any oracle
of Demo’s, but they shew a small stone urn in the temple of Apollo,
wherein they say are her remains. After Demo the Hebrews beyond
Palestine had a prophetess called Sabbe, whose father they say was
Berosus and mother Erymanthe, but some say she was a Babylonian Sibyl,
others an Egyptian.

Phaennis, (the daughter of the king of the Chaones), and the Peleæ at
Dodona, also prophesied by divine inspiration, but were not called
Sibyls. As to the age and oracles of Phaennis, one will find upon
inquiry that she was a contemporary of Antiochus, who seized the
kingdom after taking Demetrius prisoner. As to the Peleades, they were
they say earlier than Phemonoe, and were the first women that sang the
following lines:

    “Zeus was, Zeus is, Zeus shall be. O great Zeus!
    Earth yields us fruits, let us then call her Mother.”

Prophetical men, as Euclus the Cyprian, and the Athenian Musæus the
son of Antiophemus, and Lycus the son of Pandion, as well as Bacis
the Bœotian, were they say inspired by Nymphs. All their oracular
utterances except those of Lycus I have read.

Such are the women and men who up to my time have been said to have
been prophetically inspired: and as time goes on there will perhaps be
other similar cases.[98]

[97] The text is somewhat uncertain here. I have tried to extract the
best sense.

[98] “Qui hoc et similia putant dicuntque _Pausaniam
opposuisse Christianis_, hos velim explicare causam, cur Pausanias
tecte tantum in illos invadere, neque usquam quidquam aperte contra eos
dicere ausus sit.” _Siebelis._




CHAPTER XIII.


The brazen head of the Pæonian bison was sent to Delphi by Dropion,
the son of Deon, king of the Pæonians. These bisons are most difficult
of all beasts to capture alive, for no nets are strong enough to hold
them. They are hunted in the following manner. When the hunters have
found a slope terminating in a hollow, they first of all fence it all
round with a palisade, they then cover the slope and level ground near
the bottom with newly stripped hides, and if they chance to be short
of hides, then they make old dry skins slippery with oil. The most
skilful horsemen then drive these bisons to this place that I have
described, and slipping on the first hides they roll down the slope
till they get to the level ground at the bottom. There they leave them
at first, but on the 4th or 5th day, when hunger and weakness has
subdued their spirit somewhat, those who are skilled in taming them
offer them, while they are still lying there, pinenuts after first
removing the husks, for they will at first touch no other kind of food,
and at last they bind them and lead them off. This is how they capture
them.

Opposite the brazen head of this bison is the statue of a man with a
coat of mail on and a cloak over it: the Delphians say it is a votive
offering of the people of Andros, and that it is Andreus their founder.
And the statues of Apollo and Athene and Artemis are votive offerings
of the Phocians from spoil of the Thessalians, their constant enemies,
and neighbours except where the Epicnemidian Locrians come in. Votive
offerings have been also made by the Thessalians of Pharsalus, and by
the Macedonians who dwell at Dium under Pieria, and by the Greeks of
Cyrene in Libya. These last sent a chariot and statue of Ammon on the
chariot, and the Macedonians at Dium sent an Apollo who has hold of a
doe, and the Pharsalians sent an Achilles on horseback, and Patroclus
is running by the side of the horse. And the Dorians of Corinth built a
treasury also, and the gold from the Lydians was stored there. And the
statue of Hercules was the votive offering of the Thebans at the time
they fought with the Phocians what is called The Sacred War. Here also
are the brazen effigies erected by the Phocians, when in the second
encounter they routed the Thessalian cavalry. The people of Phlius also
sent to Delphi a brazen Zeus, and an effigy of Ægina with Zeus.[99] And
from Mantinea in Arcadia there is an offering of a brazen Apollo, not
far from the treasury of the Corinthians.

Hercules and Apollo are also to be seen close to a tripod for the
possession of which they are about to fight, but Leto and Artemis are
trying to appease the anger of Apollo, and Athene that of Hercules.
This was the votive offering of the Phocians when Tellias of Elis led
them against the Thessalians. The other figures in the group were made
jointly by Diyllus and Amyclæus, but Athene and Artemis were made
by Chionis, all 3 Corinthian statuaries. It is also recorded by the
Delphians that, when Hercules the son of Amphitryon came to consult the
oracle, the priestess Xenoclea would not give him any response because
of his murder of Iphitus: so he took the tripod and carried it out of
the temple, and the prophetess said,

 “This is another Hercules, the one from Tiryns not from Canopus.”

For earlier still the Egyptian Hercules had come to Delphi. Then the
son of Amphitryon restored the tripod to Apollo, and got the desired
answer from Xenoclea. And poets have handed down the tradition, and
sung of the contest of Hercules and Apollo for the tripod.

After the battle of Platæa the Greeks in common made a votive offering
of a gold tripod standing on a bronze dragon. The bronze part of the
votive offering was there in my time, but the golden part had been
abstracted by the Phocian leaders.[100] The Tarentines also sent to
Delphi another tenth of spoil taken from the Peucetian barbarians.
These votive offerings were the works of art of Onatas the Æginetan
and Calynthus, and are effigies of footsoldiers and cavalry, Opis king
of the Iapyges come to the aid of the Peucetii. He is represented in
the battle as a dying man, and as he lies on the ground there stand by
him the hero Taras and the Lacedæmonian Phalanthus, and at no great
distance a dolphin: for Phalanthus before he went to Italy suffered
shipwreck in the Crissæan Gulf, and was they say brought safe to shore
by a dolphin.

[99] Ægina was the daughter of the river-god Asopus, and was carried
off from Phlius by Zeus. See Book ii. ch. 5. Hence the offering of the
people of Phlius.

[100] See _Rawlinson’s_ Herodotus, Book ix. ch. 81.




CHAPTER XIV.


The axes which were the votive offering of Periclytus, the son of
Euthymachus of Tenedos, have an old legend connected with them. Cycnus
was they say the son of Poseidon, and king at Colonæ, a town in the
Troad near the island Leucophrys. This Cycnus had a daughter Hemithea
and a son Tennes by Proclea, daughter of Clytius, and sister of that
Caletor of whom Homer says in the Iliad[101] that he was slain by Ajax
when he tried to set on fire the ship of Protesilaus,--and, Proclea
dying, Cycnus married for his second wife Phylonome, the daughter of
Cragasus, who failing to win the love of Tennes told her husband that
Tennes wanted to have illicit dealings with her against her will, and
Cycnus believed this lie, and put Tennes and his sister into a chest,
and sent them to sea in it. And they got safe to the island Leucophrys,
since called Tenedos from Tennes. And Cycnus, who was not destined to
be ignorant of his wife’s deception all his life, when he learned the
truth sailed after his son to implore his forgiveness, and to admit
his unwitting error. And as he was anchoring at the island, and was
fastening his vessel by ropes to some tree or piece of rock, Tennes in
his rage cut the ropes with his axe. Hence it is passed into a proverb,
when people obstinately decline a conference, that they resemble him
who cut the matter short with his Tenedian axe. Tennes was afterwards
slain the Greeks say by Achilles as he was defending Tenedos, and
in process of time the people of Tenedos, as they were weak, joined
themselves to the people of Alexandria on the mainland of the Troad.

The Greeks who fought against the King of the Persians erected at
Olympia a brazen Zeus, and an Apollo at Delphi, after the actions of
Artemisium and Salamis. It is said also that Themistocles, when he
went to Delphi, brought of the spoils of the Medes as a present to
Apollo, and when he asked if he should offer them inside the temple,
the Pythian Priestess bade him at once take them away altogether. And
these were the words of her oracular response: “Put not in my temple
the beautiful spoils of the Persians, send them home as quickly as
possible.” It is wonderful that the god declined to accept the spoils
of the Medes only from Themistocles. Some think the god would have
rejected all the Persian spoil equally, if those who offered it had
first asked (like Themistocles) if the god would accept it. Others say
that, as the god knew that Themistocles would be a suppliant of the
Persians, he refused on that account to accept the spoil from him, that
he might not win for him by acceptance the undying hate of the Medes.
This invasion of Greece by the barbarian you may find foretold in the
oracles of Bacis, and earlier still in the verses of Euclus.

Near the great altar is a bronze wolf, the votive offering of the
Delphians themselves. The tradition about it is that some man plundered
the treasures of the god, and hid himself and the gold in that part
of Parnassus where the forest trees were most thick, and that a wolf
attacked him as he slept and killed him, and that this wolf used to run
into the town daily and howl: and the Delphians thought this could not
but be by divine direction, so they followed the wolf and discovered
the sacred gold, and offered to the god a bronze wolf.

[101] xv. 419-421.




CHAPTER XV.


The gilt statue of Phryne here was made by Praxiteles, one of her
lovers, and was an offering of Phryne herself. And next it are two
statues of Apollo, one offered by the Epidaurians in Argolis after
victory over the Medes, and the other by the Megarians after their
victory over the Athenians at Nisæa. And there is an ox an offering
of the Platæans, when they defended themselves successfully on their
own soil with the rest of the Greeks against Mardonius the son of
Gobryas. Next come two more statues of Apollo, one offered by the
people of Heraclea near the Euxine, the other by the Amphictyones when
they fined the Phocians for cultivating land sacred to the god. This
Apollo is called by the Delphians Sitalcas,[102] and is about 35 cubits
high. Here too are statues of the Ætolian Generals, and of Artemis and
Athene, and two statues of Apollo, votive offerings of the Ætolians
after their victories over the Galati. Phaennis indeed foretold in her
oracles, a generation before it happened, that the army of the Celts
would pass from Europe to Asia to destroy the cities there.

“Then indeed the destroying host of the Galati shall cross the narrow
passage of the Hellespont, marching to the flute, and shall lawlessly
make havoc of Asia. And the god shall even afflict more grievously all
those that dwell near the sea-shore. But Cronion shall verily soon
raise up a helper, the dear son of a Zeus-reared bull, who shall bring
a day of destruction to all the Galati.”

By the bull Phaennis meant Attalus the king of Pergamus, who was also
called bull-horned in the oracle.[103]

The statues of cavalry leaders seated on horseback were offered to
Apollo by the Pheræans, when they had routed the Athenian cavalry. And
the bronze palm and gilt statue of Athene on the palm were dedicated
by the Athenians for the victory at the Eurymedon on the same day both
on land and river. I noticed that some of the gold on this statue was
plucked off. I put this down to the cupidity of sacrilegious thieves.
But Clitodemus, the oldest writer on Athenian Antiquities, says in his
account of Attica that, when the Athenians were making preparations for
the expedition to Sicily, an immense number of crows came to Delphi,
and with their beaks knocked off and tore away the gold off the statue.
He also says that they broke off the spear, the owls, and all the
fruit on the palm in imitation of real fruit. Clitodemus relates also
other prodigies to deter the Athenians from the fatal expedition to
Sicily. The people of Cyrene also placed at Delphi a figure of Battus
in his chariot, who took them by ship from Thera to Libya. Cyrene is
the charioteer, and Battus is in the chariot and Libya is crowning
him, the design is by the Cretan Amphion the son of Acestor. And when
Battus built Cyrene, he is said to have found the following remedy for
an impediment in his speech. As he was travelling in the remote parts
of Cyrene which were still unoccupied he chanced to see a lion, and his
terror at the sight made him cry out loud and clearly.[104] And not far
from Battus the Amphictyones erected another statue of Apollo, out of
the proceeds of the fine imposed on the Phocians for their impiety to
the god.

[102] _i.e._ _Prohibitor of corn-growing_ (on the sacred land).

[103] The words of the oracle were as follows:

    Θάρσει Ταυρόκερως, ἕξεις βασιληίδα τιμὴν
    καὶ παίδων παῖδες· τούτων γε μὲν οὐκέτι παῖδες.

[104] So the son of Crœsus found his tongue from sudden fright. See
Herodotus, i. 85.




CHAPTER XVI.


Of the votive offerings which the Lydian kings sent to Apollo nothing
now remains but the iron base of the bowl of Alyattes. This was made
by Glaucus of Chios, who first welded iron, and the places where the
base is joined are not riveted together by bolts or nails, but simply
by welding. This base from a broad bottom rises turret-like to a
point. The sides are not entirely covered, but have girders of iron
like the steps in a ladder. Straight bars of iron bend outwards at the
extremities, and this is the seat for the bowl.

What is called by the Delphians the navel, made of white stone, is
according to their tradition the centre of the world, and Pindar in one
of his Odes gives a similar account.[105] Here is a votive offering of
the Lacedæmonians, a statue by Calamis of Hermione, the daughter of
Menelaus and wife of Orestes (the son of Agamemnon), and still earlier
the wife of Neoptolemus the son of Achilles. The Ætolians have also
erected a statue to Eurydamus their general, who commanded their army
against the Galati.

There is still among the mountains of Crete a town called Elyrus, its
inhabitants sent a brazen goat as their offering to Delphi. This goat
is represented suckling Phylacides and Philander, who according to the
people of Elyrus were the sons of Apollo by the Nymph Acacallis, with
whom he had an intrigue in the city Tarrha in the house of Carmanor.

The Carystians also from Eubœa offered a brazen ox to Apollo after
the Median war. I think both they and the Platæans made their votive
offerings because, after repulsing the barbarian, they enjoyed
prosperity in other respects and a free land to cultivate. The Ætolians
also sent effigies of their generals and Apollo and Artemis, when they
had subdued their neighbours the Acarnanians.

The strangest thing I heard of was what happened in the seafight
between the Liparæans and Tyrrhenians. The Pythian Priestess bade
the Liparæans fight a naval engagement with the Tyrrhenians with as
small a fleet as possible. They put to sea therefore with only five
triremes, and the Tyrrhenians, thinking themselves quite a match for
the Liparæans, put out to sea against them with only the same number of
ships. And the Liparæans took them, and also another five that put out
against them, and a third and even fourth set of five ships. They then
placed at Delphi as votive offerings as many statues of Apollo as they
had captured ships. Echecratides of Larissa offered the small Apollo,
and the Delphians say this was the first of all the votive offerings.

[105] Pindar _Pyth._ viii. 85. So also Æschylus, _Eumen._ 40.




CHAPTER XVII.


Of the western barbarians the Sardinians offered a brazen statue
of Sardus, from whom their island took its name. For its size and
prosperity Sardinia is equal to the most celebrated islands. What its
ancient name was among its original inhabitants I do not know, but
the Greeks who sailed there for commerce called it Ichnusa, because
its shape was like that of a man’s foot-print. Its length is about
1,120 stades and its breadth 470. The first that crossed over into
the island were they say Libyans, their leader was Sardus, the son of
that Maceris who was called Hercules by the Egyptians and Libyans.
The most notable thing Maceris ever did was to journey to Delphi: but
Sardus led the Libyans to Ichnusa, and gave his name to the island.
They did not however eject the original inhabitants of the island, but
the new comers were received as fellow colonists rather from necessity
than choice. Neither did the Libyans nor the aborigines of the island
know how to build cities, but lived dispersed in huts and caves as
each chanced. But some years after the Libyans some Greeks came to
the island under Aristæus, (who was they say the son of Apollo by
Cyrene): and who migrated they say to Sardinia in excessive grief at
the death of Actæon, which made him ill at ease in Bœotia and indeed
all Greece. There are some who think that Dædalus fled at the same time
from Camicus, owing to the hostility of the Cretans, and took part in
this colony of Aristæus: but it is altogether beyond probability that
Dædalus, who was a contemporary of Œdipus when he reigned at Thebes,
could have shared either in a colony or in anything else with Aristæus,
the husband of Autonoe the daughter of Cadmus. Nor do I think that even
these Greeks built a town, inasmuch as in numbers and strength they
were inadequate to such a task. And after Aristæus the Iberes crossed
into Sardinia under Norax, and built the town of Nora, which is the
first mentioned in the island: Norax was they say the son of Hermes
by Erythea the daughter of Geryon. And a fourth band of colonists of
Thespians and Athenians under Iolaus came to Sardinia and built the
town of Olbia, and the Athenians separately built the town which they
called Ogryle, either preserving the name of one of their townships
in this way, or because Ogrylus was one of the expedition. There are
still places in Sardinia called after Iolaus, who is still honoured by
the inhabitants. And after the capture of Ilium several of the Trojans
escaped, as well as those who got off safe with Æneas; part of them
were carried by the winds to Sardinia, and mixed with the Greeks who
had gone there earlier. And what hindered the barbarians from fighting
against the Greeks and Trojans was that in their equipment for war
they stood on an equality, and both armies feared to cross the river
Thorsus which parted them. Many years afterwards however the Libyans
passed over into the island a second time with a larger host, and
fought against the Greeks, and entirely destroyed all but a remnant,
and the Trojans fled to the hilly parts of the island, and occupying
the mountains, which were difficult of access from the rocks and
crags, are called to this day Ilians, but they resemble the Libyans
in their appearance and armour and mode of living. And there is an
island not far from Sardinia, called by the Greeks Cyrnus, but by its
Libyan inhabitants Corsica. A large contingent in this island, who had
suffered grievously from faction, crossed over to Sardinia and dwelt
in part of the mountainous district, and were called by the Sardinians
Corsi from the name of their fatherland. And when the Carthaginians
became a great naval power, they subdued all the Sardinians but the
Ilians and the Corsi, (who were prevented from being reduced to slavery
by the security which the mountains gave them,) and themselves built
in the island the towns Caralis and Sulci. And the Libyans or Iberes,
who were allies of the Carthaginians, disputed over the spoil, and
got so angry that they parted from them, and they also went and dwelt
in the mountainous parts of the island. And they were called Balari,
according to the dialect of the people of Cyrnus, who give that
name to exiles. Such are the races that inhabit Sardinia, and such
are the towns they have built. And in the island towards the North
and the mainland of Italy is a mountain range difficult of access,
whose summits are contiguous, and this part of the island affords no
harbours to mariners, but violent gusts and squalls of wind sweep
from the mountain-tops over the sea. In the middle of the island are
other mountains less lofty, but the air there is generally turbid and
pestilential, in consequence of the salt that crystallizes there, and
the violence of the South Wind; for the North Winds, on account of
the height of the mountains towards Italy, are prevented from blowing
in summer time so as to cool the air and soil. Some say that Cyrnus
is not further by sea from Sardinia than eight stades, and as it is
mountainous and lofty throughout, they think it prevents either the
West or North West Winds reaching Sardinia. There are no serpents in
the island either venomous or harmless, nor wolves. The rams are of no
greater size than elsewhere, but their appearance is just such as a
statuary in Ægina might suppose a wild ram to be, thicker however in
the breast than the Æginetan works of art, and the horns do not stand
out direct from the head, but twist round the ears, and in speed they
surpass all animals. The island is free from all deadly grasses and
herbs with one exception, a grass like parsley which is deadly, and
those who eat of it die laughing. This is the origin of Homer[106]
and subsequent writers speaking of the Sardonic laughter when things
are in evil plight. This grass grows chiefly near springs, but does
not communicate to them its venom. We have introduced this account of
Sardinia into our history of Phocis, because the Greeks have such very
scanty knowledge about the island.

[106] Odyssey, xx. 301, 302.




CHAPTER XVIII.


The horse, which is next the statue of Sardus, was they say the votive
offering of the Athenian Callias (the son of Lysimachides), out of his
own personal gains in the Persian war. And the Achæans offered a statue
of Athene after they had reduced the town of Phana in Ætolia by siege.
The siege lasted a long time, and, when the besiegers found they could
not take the town, they sent messengers to Delphi, and this was the
response they received.

“O inhabitants of the land of Pelops and of Achaia, who come to Pytho
to enquire how you are to capture the town, observe what portion of
water daily given to the inhabitants keeps them alive, and how much the
town has already drunk. In this way may you take the fenced village of
Phana.”

Not understanding the meaning of the oracle, they resolved to raise
the siege and depart homewards, as the inhabitants of the besieged
place took very little heed of them, when a woman came out of the town
to fetch water from a well near the walls. They hurried up from the
camp and took this woman prisoner, and the Achæans learned from her
that the little water from this well (when they got it each night) was
measured out, and the people in the town had no other water whatever to
drink. So the Achæans fouled the water so as to make it undrinkable and
captured the town.

And next to this statue of Athene the Rhodians of Lindus erected a
statue of Apollo. And the Ambraciotes offered a brazen ass, after
their victory by night over the Molossi. The Molossi had made ready
for a night attack on them, when an ass, who chanced to be driven from
the field, pursuing a she-ass with lust and braying, and the driver
also crying out in a loud and disorderly manner, the Molossi were so
dismayed where they were in ambush that they left the place, and the
Ambraciotes detected their plan, and attacked and defeated them that
very night.

And the people of Orneæ in Argolis, as the Sicyonians pressed them
hard in war, vowed to Apollo, if they should succeed in repelling
the Sicyonians, to have a procession to him at Delphi daily and to
sacrifice to him any quantity of victims. They obtained the wished-for
victory, but as to discharge their vow daily was a great expense, and
the trouble even greater than the expense, they hit upon the expedient
of offering to the god representations in brass of the procession and
sacrifice.

Here too is a representation in iron of the contest between Hercules
and the Hydra, the votive offering and design of Tisagoras. Making
statues in iron is most difficult and laborious. This Tisagoras,
whoever he was, is famed for the heads of a lion and wild boar at
Pergamus. These are also in iron, and were a votive offering of his to
Dionysus.

And the Phocians of Elatea, who held out against the siege of Cassander
till Olympiodorus came from Athens to their relief, sent a brazen lion
to Apollo at Delphi. And the Apollo next that lion is the offering of
the Massaliotes for their victory over the Carthaginians in a sea-fight.

The Ætolians also erected a trophy and statue of an armed woman,
(Ætolia to wit), out of the fine they imposed on the Galati for their
cruelty to the people of Callion.[107] There is also a gilt statue of
Gorgias of Leontini, his own votive offering.

[107] See ch. 22.




CHAPTER XIX.


Next to the statue of Gorgias is a votive offering of the Amphictyones,
a statue of Scyllis of Scione, who had wonderful fame as a diver, and
taught his daughter Hydna diving. When a violent storm came on Xerxes’
fleet off Mount Pelion they greatly added to the wrecks, by diving
down and cutting the cables that kept the ships at anchor. It was for
this good service that the Amphictyones made statues of Scyllis and his
daughter. And among the statues that Nero took away from Delphi was
this of Hydna. [Virgins that are virgins indeed still dive in the sea
with impunity.][108]

I shall next relate a Lesbian tradition. The nets of some fishermen
at Methymna fished up out of the sea a head made of olive-wood, which
seemed that of a foreign god, and not one worshipped by the Greeks. The
people of Methymna inquired therefore of the Pythian priestess what god
or hero it belonged to, and she bade them worship Phallenian Dionysus.
Accordingly the people of Methymna offered their vows and sacrifices to
it, and sent a bronze imitation of it to Delphi.

On the gables are representations of Artemis and Leto and Apollo and
the Muses, and the setting of the Sun, and Dionysus and the Thyiades.
The faces of all these are by the Athenian Praxias, the pupil of
Calamis: but as the temple took some time to build Praxias died before
it was finished, and the rest of the carving on the gables was by
Androsthenes, also an Athenian, and the pupil of Eucadmus. Of the
golden arms on the architraves, the Athenians offered the shields after
the victory at Marathon, and the Ætolians the arms of the Galati behind
and on the left, which resemble the Persian shields called _Gerrha_.

Of the irruption of the Galati into Greece I gave some account in
connection with the council-chamber at Athens: but I prefer to give
the fullest account in connection with Delphi, because the greatest
struggle between them and the Greeks took place here. The first
expedition of the Celts beyond their borders was under Cambaules: but
when they got as far as Thrace on that occasion they did not dare to
go any further, recognising that they were too few in number to cope
with the Greeks. But on the second expedition, egged on by those who
had formed part of the army of Cambaules, who had tasted the sweets of
plunder and were enamoured of the gains of looting, a large army of
both infantry and cavalry mustered together. This army the commanders
divided into three parts, and each marched into a different district.
Cerethrius was to march against the Thracians and the Triballi: Brennus
and Acichorius were to lead their division into Pæonia: and Bolgius
was to march against the Macedonians and Illyrians. This last fought a
battle against Ptolemy king of the Macedonians, who had treacherously
slain Seleucus the son of Antiochus, (though he had been a suppliant
at his court), and was nicknamed Lightning on account of his
audacity.[109] In this battle Ptolemy fell, and with him no small part
of the Macedonians: but the Celts durst not adventure any further into
Greece, and so this second expedition returned home again. Thereupon
Brennus urgently pressed upon the general assemblies, and upon each
individual chieftain of the Galati, the advantages of invading Greece,
pointing out her weak state at that period, and the immense wealth of
her community, her votive offerings in the temples, her quantity of
silver and gold. He succeeded in persuading the Galati to invade Greece
once more, and among other chieftains he chose Acichorius once more as
his colleague. The army mustered 152,000 foot and 20,400 horse. Such
at least was the fighting force of the cavalry, for its real number
was 61,200: as each horse-soldier had two servants, who themselves
were excellent cavalry also and mounted. For the custom of the Galati
in an engagement was that these servants should remain in the rear
close at hand, and if a horse was killed they supplied a fresh one,
and if the rider was killed one of them took his place, and if he too
was killed then the third took his place. And if one of the masters
was only wounded, then one of his servants removed him to the camp,
and the other took his place in the battle. In this custom I think the
Galati imitated the 10,000 Persians, called _The Immortals_. But the
difference was that _The Immortals_ were a reserve force only used at
the end of an action, whereas the Galati used these reserves as wanted
all through the action. This mode of fighting they called _Trimarcisia_
in their dialect: for the Celts called a horse _marca_. Such was the
force, such the intentions, with which Brennus marched into Greece.

[108] I follow _Schubart_ in surrounding this remarkable statement with
brackets.

[109] See the circumstances in Book i. ch. 16.




CHAPTER XX.


The Greeks for their part, though very dejected, were induced to fight
bravely for their country by the very urgency of the peril. For they
saw that at the present crisis it was not merely their liberty that
was at stake, as at the time of the Persian invasion, but that, even
if they granted land and water to the enemy,[110] they would have no
future security. For they still remembered the former irruption of the
Galati into Macedonia and Thrace and Pæonia, and their recent outrages
in Thessaly had been reported to them. It was the universal opinion
therefore, both with individuals and states, that they must either die
or conquer.

It will not be without instruction to compare the numbers of those
who fought against Xerxes at Thermopylæ with those who fought now
against the Galati. The Greeks that marched against the Mede were as
follows: 300 Lacedæmonians only under Leonidas, 500 from Tegea, 500
from Mantinea, 120 Arcadians from Orchomenus, 1000 from the other towns
of Arcadia, 80 from Mycenæ, 200 from Phlius, 400 from Corinth, 700
Bœotians from Thespia and 400 from Thebes. And 1,000 Phocians guarded
the pass at Mount Œta, who must be added to the Greek contingent. As
to the Locrians under Mount Cnemis Herodotus has not mentioned their
precise number, he only says they came from all the towns. But we
may conjecture their number pretty accurately: for the Athenians at
Marathon, including slaves and non-combatants, were not more than
9,000: so that the fighting force of Locrians at Thermopylæ could not
be more than 6,000. Thus the whole force employed against the Persians
would be 11,200. Nor did all of these stay all the time under arms at
Thermopylæ, for except the men from Lacedæmon and Thespia and Mycenæ
they waited not to see the issue of the fight. And now against these
barbarians who had crossed the ocean the following Greeks banded
themselves at Thermopylæ: 10,000 heavy armed infantry and 500 horse
from Bœotia, under the Bœotarchs Cephisodotus and Thearidas and
Diogenes and Lysander: 500 cavalry and 3,000 foot from Phocis, under
Critobulus and Antiochus: 700 Locrians, all infantry, from the island
Atalanta, under the command of Midias: 400 heavy armed infantry of
the Megarians, their cavalry under the command of Megareus: of the
Ætolians, who formed the largest and most formidable contingent, the
number of their horse is not recorded, but their light-armed troops
were 90,[111] and their heavy armed 7000: and the Ætolians were under
the command of Polyarchus and Polyphron and Lacrates. And the Athenians
were under Callippus the son of Mœrocles, as I have before stated, and
consisted of all the triremes that were sea-worthy, and 500 horse, and
1,000 foot, and because of their ancient renown they were in command of
the whole allied army. And some mercenary troops were sent by various
kings, as 500 from Macedonia, and 500 from Asia, those that were sent
by Antigonus were led by Aristodemus the Macedonian, and those that
were sent by Antiochus were led by Telesarchus, as also some Syrians
from Asia situated by the river Orontes.

When these Greeks, thus banded together at Thermopylæ, heard that the
army of the Galati was already in the neighbourhood of Magnesia and
Phthiotis, they determined to send about 1,000 picked light-armed
soldiers and a troop of horse to the river Sperchius, to prevent the
barbarians’ crossing the river without a struggle. And they went and
destroyed the bridges, and encamped by the river. Now Brennus was by no
means devoid of intelligence, and for a barbarian no mean strategist.
Accordingly on the following night without any delay he sent 10,000 of
his troops, who could swim and were remarkably tall,--and all the Celts
are remarkably tall men--down the river to cross it not at the ordinary
fords, but at a part of the river where it was less rapid, and marshy,
and diffused itself more over the plain, so that the Greeks should not
be able to notice their crossing over. They crossed over accordingly,
swimming over the marshy part of the river, and using the shields of
their country as a sort of raft, while the tallest of them could ford
the river. When the Greeks at the Sperchius noticed that part of the
barbarians had crossed over, they returned at once to the main army.

[110] The technical term for submission to an enemy. See Herodotus, v.
17, 18; vii. 133.

[111] This 90 seeming a very small force, _Schubart_ conjectures 790,
_Brandstäter_ 1090.




CHAPTER XXI.


Brennus next ordered those who dwelt near the Maliac Bay to throw
bridges over the Sperchius: which they did quickly, standing greatly in
dread of him, and being very desirous that the barbarians should depart
and not injure them by a long stay in their part of the country. Then
Brennus passed his army across these bridges, and marched for Heraclea.
And though they did not capture it, the Galati ravaged the country, and
slew the men that were left in the fields. The year before the Ætolians
had compelled the people of Heraclea to join the Ætolian League, and
now they protected Heraclea just as if it was their own. That is why
Brennus did not capture it, but he paid no great attention to it, his
only anxiety being to dislodge the enemy from the passes, and get into
Greece by Thermopylæ.

He advanced therefore from Heraclea, and learning from deserters
that a strong force from all the Greek cities was concentrated at
Thermopylæ, he despised his enemy, and the following day at daybreak
opened battle, having no Greek seer with him, or any priests of his
own country, if indeed the Celts practise divination. Thereupon the
Greeks advanced silently and in good order: and when the two armies
engaged, the infantry were careful not to break their line, and the
light-armed troops keeping their ground discharged their darts arrows
and slings at the barbarians. The cavalry on both sides was useless,
not only from the narrowness of the pass, but also from the smooth and
slippery and rocky nature of the ground, intersected also throughout by
various mountain streams. The armour of the Galati was inferior, for
their only defensive armour was the shield used in their country, and
moreover they were less experienced in the art of war. But they fought
like wild beasts with rage and fury and headlong inconsiderate valour:
and, whether hacked about by swords and battle-axes, or pierced with
darts and javelins, desisted not from their furious attacks till bereft
of life. Some even plucked out of their wounds the weapons with which
they had been wounded, and hurled them back, or used them in hand to
hand fight. Meantime the Athenians on their triremes, not without great
difficulty and danger, sailed along the mud which is very plentiful
in that arm of the sea, and got their vessels as near the barbarians
as they could, and shot at their flanks with all kinds of darts and
arrows. And the Celts by now getting far the worst of it, and in the
press suffering far more loss than they could inflict, had the signal
to retire to their camp given them by their commanders. Accordingly
retreating in no order and in great confusion, many got trodden
underfoot by one another, and many falling into the marsh disappeared
in it, so that the loss in the retreat was as great as in the heat of
action.

On this day the Athenians exhibited more valour than all the other
Greeks, and especially Cydias, who was very young and fought now for
the first time. And as he was killed by the Galati his relations hung
up his shield to Zeus Eleutherius with the following inscription,

 “Here I hang in vain regret for the young Cydias, I once the shield of
 that good warrior, now a votive offering to Zeus, the shield which he
 carried on his left arm for the first time, on that day when fierce
 war blazed out against the Galati.”

This inscription remained till Sulla’s soldiers removed the shields in
the portico of Zeus Eleutherius, as well as other notable things at
Athens.

And after the battle at Thermopylæ the Greeks buried their dead, and
stripped the bodies of the barbarians. But the Galati not only asked
not permission to bury their dead, but plainly did not care whether
their dead obtained burial or were torn to pieces by birds and beasts.
Two things in my opinion made them thus indifferent to the burial of
their dead, one to strike awe in their enemies by their ferocity, the
other that they do not habitually mourn for their dead. In the battle
fell 40 Greeks, how many barbarians cannot be accurately ascertained,
for many of them were lost in the marsh.




CHAPTER XXII.


On the seventh day after the battle a division of the Galati
endeavoured to cross Mount Œta by Heraclea, by a narrow pass near the
ruins of Trachis, not far from which was a temple of Athene, rich in
votive offerings. The barbarians hoped to cross Mount Œta by this pass,
and also to plunder the temple by the way. The garrison however under
the command of Telesarchus defeated the barbarians, though Telesarchus
fell in the action, a man zealously devoted to the Greek cause.

The other commanders of the barbarians were astounded at the Greek
successes, and doubted whereunto these things would grow, seeing that
at present their own fortunes were desperate, but Brennus thought that,
if he could force the Ætolians back into Ætolia, the war against the
other Greeks would be easier. He selected therefore out of his whole
army 40,000 foot and about 800 horse, all picked men, and put them
under the command of Orestorius and Combutis. And they recrossed the
Sperchius by the bridges, and marched through Thessaly into Ætolia.
And their actions at Callion were the most atrocious of any that we
have ever heard of, and quite unlike human beings. They butchered all
the males, and likewise old men, and babes at their mother’s breasts:
they even drank the blood, and feasted on the flesh, of babies that
were fat. And high-spirited women and maidens in their flower committed
suicide when the town was taken: and those that survived the barbarians
submitted to every kind of outrage, being by nature incapable of pity
and natural affection. And some of the women rushed upon the swords
of the Galati and voluntarily courted death: to others death soon
came from absence of food and sleep, as these merciless barbarians
outraged them in turn, and wreaked their lusts on them whether dying or
dead. And the Ætolians having learnt from messengers of the disasters
that had fallen upon them, removed their forces with all speed from
Thermopylæ, and pressed into Ætolia, furious at the sufferings of
the people of Callion, and even still more anxious to save the towns
that had not yet been captured. And the young men flocked out from
all their towns to swell their army, old men also mixed with them
inspirited by the crisis, and even their women volunteered their
services, being more furious against the Galati than even the men. And
the barbarians, having plundered the houses and temples and set fire
to Callion, marched back to the main army at Thermopylæ: and on the
road the people of Patræ were the only Achæans that helped the Ætolians
and fell on the barbarians, being as they were capital heavy-armed
soldiers, but hard-pressed from the quantity of the Galati and their
desperate valour. But the Ætolian men and women lined the roads and
threw missiles at the barbarians with great effect, as they had no
defensive armour but their national shields, and when the Galati
pursued them they easily ran away, and when they desisted from the
vain pursuit harassed them again continually. And though Callion had
suffered so grievously, that what Homer relates of the contest between
the Læstrygones and the Cyclops seems less improbable,[112] yet the
vengeance which the Ætolians took was not inadequate: for of the 40,800
barbarians not more than half got back safe to the camp at Thermopylæ.

In the meantime the fortunes of the Greeks at Thermopylæ were as
follows. One pass over Mount Œta is above Trachis, most steep and
precipitous, the other through the district of the Ænianes is easier
for an army, and is the way by which Hydarnes the Mede formerly
turned the flank of Leonidas’ forces. By this way the Ænianes and
people of Heraclea promised to conduct Brennus, out of no ill-will
to the Greeks, but thinking it a great point if they could get the
Celts to leave their district and not remain there to their utter
ruin. So true are the words of Pindar, when he says that everybody is
oppressed by his own troubles, but is indifferent to the misfortunes
of other people.[113] And this promise of the Ænianes and people of
Heraclea encouraged Brennus: and he left Acichorius with the main army,
instructing him to attack the Greek force, when he (Brennus) should
have got to their rear: and himself marched through the pass with
40,000 picked men. And it so happened that that day there was a great
mist on the mountain which obscured the sun, so that the barbarians
were not noticed by the Phocians who guarded the pass till they got
to close quarters and attacked them. The Phocians defended themselves
bravely, but were at last overpowered and retired from the pass: but
were in time to get to the main force, and report what had happened,
before the Greeks got completely surrounded oh all sides. Thereupon the
Athenians took the Greeks on board their triremes at Thermopylæ: and
they dispersed each to their own nationality.

[112] Odyssey, x. 199, 200.

[113] _Nem._ i. 82. Thus _La Rochefoucauld_ is anticipated. “Nous avons
tous assez de force pour supporter les maux d’autrui.”




CHAPTER XXIII.


And Brennus, waiting only till Acichorius’ troops should come up from
the camp, marched for Delphi. And the inhabitants fled to the oracle
in great alarm, but the god told them not to fear, he would protect
his own. And the following Greeks came up to fight for the god; the
Phocians from all their towns, 400 heavy armed soldiers from Amphissa,
of the Ætolians only a few at first, when they heard of the onward
march of the barbarians, but afterwards Philomelus brought up 1200. For
the flower of the Ætolian army directed itself against the division of
Acichorius, not bringing on a general engagement, but attacking their
rearguard as they marched, plundering their baggage and killing the
men in charge of it, and thus impeding their march considerably. And
Acichorius had left a detachment at Heraclea, to guard the treasure in
his camp.

So Brennus and the Greeks gathered together at Delphi drew up against
one another in battle-array. And the god showed in the plainest
possible way his enmity to the barbarians. For the whole ground
occupied by the army of the Galati violently rocked most of the day,
and there was continuous thunder and lightning, which astounded the
Celts and prevented their hearing the orders of their officers, and the
lightning hit not only some particular individual here and there, but
set on fire all round him and their arms. And appearances of heroes,
as Hyperochus and Laodocus and Pyrrhus, and Phylacus--a local hero at
Delphi--were seen on the battle field. And many Phocians fell in the
action and among others Aleximachus, who slew more barbarians with
his own hand than any other of the Greeks, and who was remarkable
for his manly vigour, strength of frame and daring, and his statue
was afterwards placed by the Phocians in the temple of Apollo at
Delphi. Such was the condition and terror of the barbarians all the
day, and during the night things were still worse with them, for it
was bitterly cold and snowed hard, and great stones came tumbling
down from Parnassus, and whole crags broke off and seemed to make the
barbarians their mark, and not one or two but thirty and even more,
as they stood on guard or rested, were killed at once by the fall of
one of these crags. And the next day at daybreak the Greeks poured
out of Delphi and attacked them, some straight in front, but the
Phocians, who had the best acquaintance with the ground, came down
the steep sides of Parnassus through the snow, and fell on the Celtic
rear unexpectedly, and hurled javelins at them, and shot at them with
perfect security. At the beginning of the battle the Galati, especially
Brennus’ body-guard who were the finest and boldest men in their army,
fought with conspicuous bravery, though they were shot at on all
sides, and suffered frightfully from the cold, especially such as were
wounded: but when Brennus was wounded, and taken off the field in a
fainting condition, then the barbarians sorely against their will beat
a retreat, (as the Greeks by now pressed them hard on all sides), and
killed those of their comrades who could not retreat with them owing to
their wounds or weakness.

These fugitive Galati bivouacked where they had got to when night came
on them, and during the night were seized with panic fear, that is a
fear arising without any solid cause. This panic came upon them late in
the night, and was at first confined to a few, who thought they heard
the noise of horses galloping up and that the enemy was approaching,
but soon it ran through the host. They therefore seized their arms, and
getting separated in the darkness mutually slew one another, neither
recognizing their native dialect, nor discerning one another’s forms
or weapons, but both sides in their panic thinking their opponents
Greeks both in language and weapons, so that this panic sent by the
god produced terrific mutual slaughter. And those Phocians, who were
left in the fields guarding the flocks and herds, were the first to
notice and report to the Greeks what had happened to the barbarians in
the night: and this nerved them to attack the Celts more vigorously
than ever, and they placed a stronger guard over their cattle, and
would not let the Galati get any articles of food from them without a
fierce fight for it, so that throughout the barbarian host there was a
deficiency of corn and all other provisions. And the number of those
that perished in Phocis was nearly 6,000 slain in battle, and more than
10,000 in the savage wintry night and in the panic, and as many more
from starvation.

Some Athenians, who had gone to Delphi to reconnoitre, brought back the
news of what had happened to the barbarians, and of the panic that the
god had sent. And when they heard this good news they marched through
Bœotia, and the Bœotians with them, and both in concert followed the
barbarians, and lay in ambush for them, and cut off the stragglers.
And Acichorius’ division had joined those who fled with Brennus
only the previous night: for the Ætolians made their progress slow,
hurling javelins at them and any other missile freely, so that only
a small part of the barbarians got safe to the camp at Heraclea. And
Brennus, though his wounds were not mortal, yet either from fear of his
comrades, or from shame, as having been the instigator of all these
woes that had happened to them in Greece, committed suicide by drinking
neat wine freely.[114] And subsequently the barbarians got to the river
Sperchius with no little difficulty, as the Ætolians attacked them
fiercely all the way, and at that river the Thessalians and Malienses
set on them with such vigour that none of them got home again.

This expedition of the Celts to Greece and their utter ruin happened
when Anaxicrates was Archon at Athens, in the second year of the 125th
Olympiad, when Ladas of Ægæ was victor in the course. And the following
year, when Democles was Archon at Athens, all the Celts[115] crossed
back again to Asia Minor. I have delivered a true account.

[114] Which after his wounds would be fatal.

[115] As _Siebelis_ well points out, this cannot refer to Brennus’
army, which we have just been told was all cut to pieces, but to the
swarm of Celts in Macedonia and Thrace, who returned to Asia Minor,
cowed by this catastrophe.




CHAPTER XXIV.


In the vestibule of the temple at Delphi are written up several wise
sayings for the conduct of life by those whom the Greeks call _The
Seven Wise Men_. These were Thales of Miletus and Bias of Priene (both
from Ionia), and (of the Æolians in Lesbos) Pittacus of Mitylene,
and (of the Dorians in Asia Minor) Cleobulus of Lindus, and Solon of
Athens, and Chilo of Sparta, and the seventh Plato (the son of Aristo)
makes[116] Myson of Chenæ, a village on Mount Œta, instead of Periander
the son of Cypselus. These Seven Wise Men came to Delphi, and offered
to Apollo those famous sayings, _Know thyself_ and _Not too much of
anything_. And they inscribed those sayings in the vestibule of the
temple.

You may also see a brazen statue of Homer on a pillar, and read the
oracle which they say was given to him, which runs as follows:

 “Fortunate and unfortunate, for you are born to both destinies, you
 inquire after your fatherland. But you have no fatherland, only a
 motherland. Your mother’s country is the island Ios, which shall
 receive your remains. But be on your guard against the riddle of young
 boys.”[117]

The inhabitants of Ios still shew the tomb of Homer, and in another
part of the island the tomb of Clymene, who they say was Homer’s
mother. But the people of Cyprus, for they too claim Homer as their
own, and say that Themisto (one of the women of their country) was
his mother, cite the following prophetical verses of Euclus touching
Homer’s birth;

 “In sea-girt Cyprus shall a great poet one day be born, whom divine
 Themisto shall give birth to in the country, a poet whose fame shall
 spread far from wealthy Salamis. And he leaving Cyprus and sailing
 over the sea shall first sing the woes of spacious Hellas, and shall
 all his days be immortal and ever fresh.”

These oracles I have heard and read, but I have nothing private to
write either about the country or age of Homer.

And in the temple is an altar of Poseidon, for the most ancient oracle
belonged to Poseidon, and there are also statues of two Fates, for
in the place of the third Fate is Zeus the Arbiter of the Fates, and
Apollo the Arbiter of the Fates. You may also see here the altar at
which the priest of Apollo slew Neoptolemus the son of Achilles, as I
have stated elsewhere. And not far from this altar is the iron Chair
of Pindar, on which they say he used to sit and sing Hymns to Apollo,
whenever he came to Delphi. In the interior of the temple, to which
only a few have access, is another statue of Apollo all gold.

As one leaves the temple and turns to the left, there are precincts
in which is the grave of Neoptolemus the son of Achilles, to whom the
people of Delphi offer funeral rites annually. And not far from this
tomb is a small stone on which they pour oil daily, and on which at
every festival they lay raw wool: and they have a tradition about this
stone, that it was the one which was given to Cronos instead of a son,
and that he afterwards voided it.

And if, after looking at this stone, you return to the temple, you will
come to the fountain Cassotis, which is walled in, and there is an
ascent to it through the wall. The water of this fountain goes they say
underground, and inspires the women in the sanctuary of the god with
prophetical powers: they say the fountain got its name from one of the
Nymphs of Parnassus.

[116] In the _Protagoras_, 343 A.

[117] The tradition the oracle refers to is that Homer died of grief,
because he could not solve the riddle which some fisher boys propounded
to him. The oracle is also alluded to in Book viii, ch. 24.




CHAPTER XXV.


Above the fountain is a building which contains some paintings of
Polygnotus, it is the votive offering of the people of Cnidos, and
is called _The Lounge_ by the people of Delphi, because they used to
assemble there in old times and discuss both serious and trifling
subjects. That there were many such places throughout Greece Homer has
shown in Melantho’s reviling of Odysseus:

“For you will not go to sleep at a smithy or at some lounge, but you
will keep talking here.”[118]

On the right as you enter the building is a painting of the capture of
Ilium and the return of the Greeks. And they are making preparations
for Menelaus’ hoisting sail, and his ship is painted with boys and
sailors all mixed up together on board: and in the middle of the
ship is Phrontis the pilot with two punting poles. Homer[119] has
represented Nestor among other things telling Telemachus about
Phrontis, how he was the son of Onetor, and pilot of Menelaus, and most
able in his art, and how he died as he sailed past Sunium in Attica.
And Menelaus, who was up to this time sailing with Nestor, was now left
behind, that he might discharge all due funeral rites for Phrontis.
Beneath Phrontis in the painting of Polygnotus is Ithæmenes carrying
some garment, and Echœax descending the gangway-ladder with a brazen
water-pot. And Polites and Strophius and Alphius are represented
taking down the tent of Menelaus, which is not far from the ship. And
Amphialus is taking down another tent, a boy is sitting at his feet,
but there is no inscription on him, and Phrontis is the only person
with a beard. His was the only name in the group that Polygnotus got
out of the Odyssey: the others I imagine he invented. There too stands
Briseis, and Diomede near her, and Iphis in front of them both, they
all appear to be gazing at Helen’s beauty. And Helen is seated, and
near her is Eurybates, who has no beard, and was I suppose the herald
of Odysseus. And Helen’s handmaids are by, Panthalis standing at her
side, and Electra fastening her sandals: these names are different
however from those Homer gives in the Iliad, when he describes Helen
and her maids going on to the walls.[120] And above Helen sits a
man clothed in purple, looking very dejected: before reading the
inscription one would conjecture that it is Helenus the son of Priam.
And near Helenus is Meges, who is wounded in the shoulder, as he is
described by Lescheos of Pyrrha, the son of Æschylinus, in his _Capture
of Ilium_, he was wounded he says by Admetus the son of Augeas in the
night-attack of the Trojans. And next to Meges is Lycomedes the son of
Creon, who is wounded on the wrist, as Lescheos says he was by Agenor.
It is manifest that Polygnotus must have read Lescheos’ poem, or he
would not have painted their wounds so accurately. He has also depicted
Lycomedes with a third wound in the ankle, and a fourth on the head.
Euryalus also the son of Mecisteus is represented as wounded in the
head and wrist. All these are above Helen in the painting: and next
Helen is Æthra the mother of Theseus with her head shaven, and Theseus’
son Demophon apparently wondering whether he could save her. And the
Argives say that Melanippus was the son of Theseus by the daughter
of Sinis, and that he won the prize in the race, when the Epigoni
restored the Nemean games which were originally introduced by Adrastus.
Lescheos has stated that Æthra escaped when Ilium was taken, and got
to the Greek camp, and was recognized by the sons of Theseus, and
Demophon asked her of Agamemnon. And he said he would willingly gratify
Demophon, but could not do so before he obtained the consent of Helen,
so a messenger was sent to Helen and she gave her consent. I think
therefore the picture represents Eurybates coming to Helen on this
errand, and delivering the message of Agamemnon. And the Trojan women
in the painting look in sad dejection as if they were captives already.
There is Andromache, with a babyboy at her breast. Lescheos says that
this babyboy was hurled from a tower, not in consequence of any decree
of the Greeks, but simply from the private hatred of Neoptolemus. There
too is Medesicaste, one of the illegitimate daughters of Priam, of whom
Homer says that she dwelt in the town of Pedæum, and married Imbrius
the son of Mentor.[121] Andromache and Medesicaste are represented
veiled: but Polyxena has her hair plaited after the manner of maidens.
The Poets represent her to have been slain at the tomb of Achilles,
and I have seen paintings both at Athens and Pergamus beyond the river
Caicus of her death. Polygnotus has also introduced Nestor into the
same painting, with a hat on his head and a spear in his hand: and
a horse near seems to be rolling in the dust. Near the horse is the
sea-shore, and you can see the pebbles, but the rest of the scene does
not resemble a sea view.

[118] Odyssey, xviii. 328, 329. See Dr. Hayman’s admirable note on this
passage.

[119] Odyssey, iii. 276 _sq._

[120] Iliad, iii. 144. Their names there are _Æthra_ and _Clymene_.

[121] Iliad, xiii. 171-173.




CHAPTER XXVI.


Above the women between Æthra and Nestor are the captives, Clymene,
and Creusa, and Aristomache, and Xenodice. Clymene is enumerated
among the captives by Stesichorus in his _Fall of Ilium_: Aristomache
likewise is represented in the poem called _The Return from Ilium_
as the daughter of Priam, and wife of Critolaus the son of Hicetaon:
but I do not remember either poet or prose-writer making mention of
Xenodice: and as to Creusa, they say that the Mother of the Gods and
Aphrodite rescued her from slavery to the Greeks, and that she was the
wife of Æneas, though Lescheos and the author of the Cyprian Poems
represent Eurydice as the wife of Æneas. Above these are painted
Deinome Metioche Pisis and Cleodice reclining on a couch: Deinome is
the only one of these mentioned in the poem called _The Little Iliad_,
so I think Polygnotus must have invented the other names. Here too is
Epeus naked knocking down the walls of Troy, and above the walls is
the head only of the Wooden Horse. Here too is Polypœtes, the son of
Pirithous, with his head bound by a fillet, and near him Acamas, the
son of Theseus, with a helmet on his head, and a crest on the helmet.
Here too is Odysseus with a coat of mail on. And Ajax the son of Oileus
is standing near the altar with a shield in his hand, taking his oath
in connection with the violation of Cassandra: Cassandra is seated on
the ground and holding fast the wooden statue of Athene, for she tore
it from its base, when Ajax dragged her away from the altar. And the
sons of Atreus are painted with their helmets on: and on Menelaus’
shield is a representation of the dragon that appeared to him as an
omen during the sacrifice at Aulis. They are administering the oath
to Ajax. And near the painting of the horse by Nestor’s side[122] is
Neoptolemus killing Elasus, whoever he was;[123] his dying agony is
well depicted: and Astynous, who is mentioned by Lescheos, has fallen
on to his knee, and Neoptolemus is in the act of smiting him with the
sword. And Polygnotus has represented Neoptolemus alone of all the
Greeks continuing to butcher the Trojans, that the painting should
correspond with the scenes depicted on the tomb of Neoptolemus. Homer
indeed calls Achilles’ son everywhere by the name of Neoptolemus, but
the Cyprian Poems say he was called Pyrrhus by Lycomedes, and that the
name Neoptolemus was given him by Phœnix, because he[124] was very
young when he first went to the wars. Here too is the painting of an
altar, and a little boy clinging to it in dire fear: a brazen coat
of mail lies on the altar, such as was worn in old times, for in our
days we seldom see such. It consisted of two pieces called _Gyala_,
one a protection for the breast and belly, the other for the back,
both joined together by clasps. And such coats of mail would afford
sufficient protection without a shield: and so Homer represented
Phorcys the Phrygian without a shield, because he was armed with this
kind of coat of mail.[125] In Polygnotus’ painting I recognize a coat
of mail of this kind: and in the temple of Ephesian Artemis Calliphon
of Samos has painted some women fitting this kind of coat of mail on
Patroclus. And Polygnotus has represented Laodice standing on the
other side of the altar. I do not find her name mentioned by any poet
among the captive Trojan women: and it seems probable enough that the
Greeks let her go. For Homer has represented in the Iliad that Menelaus
and Odysseus were entertained by Antenor, and that Laodice was the
wife of Antenor’s son Helicaon.[126] And Lescheos states that Helicaon
was wounded in the night-engagement, and recognized by Odysseus,
and rescued out of the battle alive. It follows therefore, from the
affection of Menelaus and Odysseus for the family of Antenor, that
Agamemnon and Menelaus would have offered no violence to Helicaon’s
wife. What Euphorion of Chalcis therefore has written about Laodice is
very improbable. And next Laodice is a stone prop, and a bronze laver
on it. And Medusa sits on the ground holding this prop with both her
hands. Whoever has read the Ode of Himeræus will include her among the
daughters of Priam. And near Medusa is an old woman closely shaven, (or
possibly a eunuch), with a naked child in his or her arms: the child’s
hand is before its eyes for fear.

[122] See ch. 26 nearly at the end.

[123] An Elasus is mentioned in Iliad, xvi. 696.

[124] _He_ (_i.e._ Neoptolemus). _Siebelis_ very ingeniously suggests
ὁ Ἀχιλλέως. I accept that suggestion as necessary to the
sense.

[125] See Iliad, xvii. 314. Pausanias goes a little beyond Homer
methinks.

[126] See Iliad, iii. 205-207. Also 122-124.




CHAPTER XXVII.


Of the dead in the painting are Pelis naked,[127] lying on his back,
and underneath him Eioneus and Admetus both in their coats of mail.
According to Lescheos Eioneus was slain by Neoptolemus, and Admetus
by Philoctetes. And above these are others, near the laver Leocritus,
the son of Polydamas, who was killed by Odysseus, and near Eioneus
and Admetus Corœbus the son of Mygdon. This Mygdon has a famous tomb
on the borders of the Stectorenian Phrygians, and poets have given
those Phrygians the name of Mygdones after him. Corœbus came to wed
Cassandra, and was killed by Neoptolemus according to the prevalent
tradition, but by Diomede according to Lescheos. And above Corœbus are
Priam and Axion and Agenor. Lescheos says that Priam was not slain
at the altar of Household Zeus, but was torn away from the altar and
killed by Neoptolemus with no great difficulty at the doors of the
palace. As to Hecuba, Stesichorus in his _Fall of Ilium_ has stated
that she was taken to Lycia by Apollo. And Lescheos says that Axion
was the son of Priam, and killed by Eurypylus the son of Euæmon. The
same poet states that Agenor was killed by Neoptolemus. And Echeclus,
Agenor’s son, seems to have been slain by Achilles. And Sinon, the
companion of Odysseus, and Anchialus are carrying out the corpse of
Laomedon for burial. There is another dead person in the painting,
Eresus by name; no poet, so far as my knowledge goes, has sung either
of Eresus or Laomedon. There is a painting also of the house of
Antenor, and a leopard’s skin hung up over the porch, as a sign to the
Greeks not to meddle with the family of Antenor. And Theano, _Antenor’s
wife_, is painted with her sons, Glaucus seated on his armour, and
Eurymachus seated on a stone. Near him stands Antenor with his daughter
Crino, who is carrying her baby boy. All these are depicted with
sorrowful countenances. The servants are placing a chest and other
articles on the back of an ass, on which a little boy also sits. And
under this painting is the following Elegiac couplet by Simonides.

 “Polygnotus of Thasos, the son of Aglaophon, painted these incidents
 in the capture of Ilium.”

[127] _Naked_ here, and in connection with Epeus in ch. 26, probably
only means without armour on. Cf. “Nudus ara, sere nudus.” Virg. Georg.
i. 299.




CHAPTER XXVIII.


The other part of the painting, that on the left, represents Odysseus
descending to Hades, to consult the soul of Tiresias about his return
home. In the painting is a river, which is obviously Acheron, and
there are some reeds growing in it, and some fishes so indistinct that
they look like the ghosts of fishes. And there is a boat on the river,
and a ferryman with his oars. Polygnotus has followed (I think) here
the description, in the poem called the Minyad, about Theseus and
Pirithous.

“Unwillingly did old Charon admit these living persons into his boat
meant for the use of the dead.”

Polygnotus has accordingly represented Charon as old. The persons
on board are not very easy to trace. But there is Tellis, looking
like a youth, and Cleobœa still a virgin, with a cist on her knees
such as they use in the worship of Demeter. Of Tellis I know nothing
more than that Archilochus was his greatgrandson. And Cleobœa they
say first introduced the mysteries of Demeter from Paros to Thasos.
And on the bank of the Acheron near Charon’s boat a son, who had not
treated his father well, is being strangled by his father. For the
ancients reverenced fathers exceedingly,[128] as one may infer among
other things from the conduct of those called _Pious_ at Catana, who,
when Catana was consumed by fire from Mount Ætna, took no account of
silver or gold, but the one took up his mother, the other his father,
and fled for their lives. And as they advanced with great difficulty
for the flame gathered on them, (but they would not for all that set
their parents down), the flames they say divided so as to let them
pass without hurt. These young men are still honoured at Catana. And
in Polygnotus’ painting near the man who ill-treated his father, and
has consequently a bad time of it in Hades, is a sacrilegious wretch
suffering punishment. The woman[129] who is punishing him seems well
acquainted with poison, and other things that can do man harm. Men were
also in those days remarkable for piety to the gods, as the Athenians
shewed when they captured the temple of Olympian Zeus at Syracuse, for
they removed none of the votive offerings, and left the former priest
still in charge. Datis the Mede also showed the same piety both in
word and in deed, in word to the Delians, and in deed when, finding a
statue of Apollo on a Phœnician ship, he gave it back to the people of
Tanagra to take to Delium. In those days all men honoured the deity,
and so Polygnotus introduced into his painting the sacrilegious wretch
suffering punishment. Above those I have described is Eurynomus, who
according to the Antiquarians at Delphi is a demon in Hades, and eats
the flesh of the dead clean to the bones. No such person however is
mentioned in the Odyssey, or in the Minyad, or in _The Return from
Ilium_, though these poems contain accounts of Hades and its horrors.
I shall therefore describe Eurynomus’ appearance in this painting.
His colour is a blueish-black, like that of the flies that infest
meat,[130] and he shows his fangs, and sits on a vulture’s skin. And
next him are Auge and Iphimedea from Arcadia. Auge came to Teuthras in
Mysia, and, of all the women who consorted with Hercules, bare a son
most like him. And Iphimedea is treated with very great honour by the
Carians who dwell at Mylasa.

[128] See for example Hesiod, _Works and Days_, 331, 332, with context.

[129] _Boettiger_ takes this woman to be _Punishment_ personified.

[130] Our “bluebottles.”




CHAPTER XXIX.


Above those I have already mentioned are Perimedes and Eurylochus,[131]
the comrades of Odysseus, with the victims which are black rams. And
next them is a man seated, whom the inscription states to be Ocnus.
He is representing rope-making, and a she-ass near him eats the rope
as fast as he makes it. This Ocnus they say was an industrious man,
who had an extravagant wife: and whatever he got together by industry
was very soon spent by her. This picture therefore of Polygnotus is
supposed to be a skit on Ocnus’ wife. And I know that the Ionians,
when they see anyone labouring hard to no profit, say that he is
weaving Ocnus’ rope.[132] However those who divine by the flight of
birds give the name of Ocnus to a very rare kind of heron, both large
and handsome. Tityus too is in the picture, no longer being tortured,
but worn out by his continuous punishment to a mere shadow. And if
you look at the next part of the picture, you will see Ariadne very
near the man who is ropemaking: she is sitting on a rock, and looking
at her sister Phædra, who is suspended to a rock by a rope which she
holds in both hands. She is so represented to make her end appear more
decorous. And Dionysus took Ariadne from Theseus either by some chance,
or purposely preparing an ambush for him, sailing against him with a
larger armament. This was the same Dionysus, I take it, who was the
first to invade India, and the first to throw a bridge over the river
Euphrates; the place where he built this bridge was called Zeugma, and
a rope is preserved to this day, wreathed with tendrils of the vine and
ivy, which was used in the construction of the bridge. Both Greeks and
Egyptians have many legends about Dionysus. And below Phædra Chloris is
reclining on the knees of Thyia: no one will err who states that there
was a great friendship between these two women in their lifetime: and
both came from the same neighbourhood, Orchomenus in Bœotia.[133] There
are other traditions about them, as that Poseidon had an intrigue with
Thyia, and that Chloris was married to Poseidon’s son Neleus. And next
Thyia is Procris the daughter of Erechtheus, and next her, with her
back towards her, is Clymene, who is represented in _The Return from
Ilium_ to have been the daughter of Minyas, and the wife of Cephalus
the son of Deion, and mother by him of Iphiclus. All the poets agree
that Procris was Cephalus’ wife before Clymene was, and that she was
murdered by her husband. And beyond Clymene in the interior of the
painting is the Theban Megara, who was Hercules’ wife, but eventually
repudiated by him, because he lost all his children by her, and so did
not think his marriage with her a lucky one. Above the head of those
women I have mentioned is the daughter of Salmoneus sitting on a stone,
and beside her Eriphyle is standing, lifting her fingers through her
dress to her neck. You may conjecture that she is holding the famous
necklace in the hand which is concealed by the folds of her dress. And
above Eriphyle is Elpenor, and Odysseus kneeling, holding his sword
over a ditch: and Tiresias the prophet is approaching the ditch, and
near Tiresias is Anticlea, the mother of Odysseus, sitting on a stone.
And Elpenor is wearing the coarse plaited coat usual among sea-faring
men. And below Odysseus Theseus and Pirithous are seated on the
enchanted rock, Theseus has both his own sword and that of Pirithous,
and Pirithous is looking at his like one indignant that swords are
useless for their present venture. Panyasis has represented Theseus and
Pirithous as not fastened to their seat, but that the rock grew to them
instead of fetters. The friendship between Theseus and Pirithous has
been alluded to by Homer both in the Iliad and Odyssey. In the latter
Odysseus says to the Phæacians,

 “I then perhaps had seen the heroes of former times, whom I fain would
 have seen, as Theseus and Pirithous, the famous sons of the gods.”[134]

And in the Iliad, in his chiding of Agamemnon and Achilles, Nestor uses
the following words:[135]

“I never before saw such heroes nor shall I e’er again, as Pirithous,
and Dryas shepherd of his people, and Cæneus and Exadius and divine
Polyphemus, and Theseus son of Ægeus like to the Immortals.”

[131] Odyssey, xi. 23 _sq._

[132] Propertius has an allusion to this, v. iii. 21, 22.

[133] It will be seen that I adopt the suggestion of _Siebelis_. The
reading is doubtful.

[134] Odyssey, xi. 630, 631. The last line is in brackets in modern
editions.

[135] Iliad, i. 262-265. The last line here is in brackets in modern
editions.




CHAPTER XXX.


Polygnotus has painted next the daughters of Pandareus, as to whom
Homer says, in a speech of Penelope, that their parents died through
the wrath of the gods when they were still maidens, and that as they
were orphans they were brought up by Aphrodite, and received gifts
from other goddesses, as from Hera prudence and beauty, from Artemis
tallness of stature, from Athene an education fit for women. But when
Aphrodite went up to heaven to obtain a good match for the girls from
Zeus, they were carried off in her absence by the Harpies and given by
them to the Furies. Such at least is Homer’s account about them.[136]
And Polygnotus has painted them crowned with flowers, and playing with
dice. Their names were Camiro and Clytie. Pandareus was you must know a
Milesian from Cretan Miletus, and an associate of Tantalus both in his
theft and perjury. And next the daughters of Pandareus is Antilochus
with one of his feet on a stone, and his head on both his hands. And
next him is Agamemnon, leaning on his sceptre under his left arm, and
with a staff in his hands. And Protesilaus and Achilles are seated, and
looking at one another. And above Achilles is Patroclus standing. None
of these have beards except Agamemnon. And above them is painted the
stripling Phocus, and Iaseus with a beard, who is trying to take a ring
from Phocus’ left hand. The circumstances are as follows. When Phocus,
the son of Æacus, crossed over from Ægina to the country now called
Phocis, and obtained the sovereignty over the men in that part of the
mainland, and meant to dwell there, Iaseus was most friendly with him,
and offered him various presents, as was very natural, and among others
a stone signet-ring set in gold: and when Phocus not long after sailed
back to Ægina, Peleus contrived his death: and so in the painting, as
a memorial of their friendship, Iaseus is represented as wishing to
look at the signet-ring, and Phocus letting him take it. Above them
is Mæra sitting on a stone: in _The Return from Ilium_ she is said to
have died a virgin, and to have been the daughter of Prœtus, the son
of Thersander and grandson of Sisyphus. And next Mæra is Actæon, (the
son of Aristæus), and his mother, both seated on a deerskin and holding
a fawn in their hands. And a hound for hunting is near: these are
emblems of the life and death of Actæon. And in the lower part of the
painting next to Patroclus is Orpheus sitting on a hill, with a harp
in his left hand, and with his right hand he is touching the branches
of a willow-tree, and he leans against the tree: the scene looks like
the grove of Proserpine, where Homer tells us poplars and willows
grew.[137] And Orpheus’ dress is Greek, no part of his attire is
Thracian, not even his hat. And Promedon is leaning against the other
side of the willow-tree. Some think Polygnotus introduced Promedon’s
name into legend. Others say he was a Greek who was passionately fond
of music, and especially of that of Orpheus. In the same part of the
painting is Schedius, who led the Phocians to Troy, with a dagger in
his hand, and a garland of grass on his head. And next him sits Pelias,
with beard and head all hoary, gazing at Orpheus. And Thamyris sitting
near Pelias is blind and dejected in mien, with thick hair and beard,
his lyre is broken and the strings torn asunder. Above him is Marsyas,
seated on a stone, and near him Olympus, a handsome boy, learning to
play on the pipe. The Phrygians at Celænæ represent that the river
flowing through their town was formerly this piper Marsyas, and that
the piping in honour of Cybele was his invention: they say also that
they repulsed the army of the Galati through his aid, as he assisted
them both with the water of the river and his melody.

[136] Odyssey, xx. 63 _sq._

[137] Odyssey, x. 509, 510.




CHAPTER XXXI.


If you look again at the upper part of the painting, you will see next
Actæon Salaminian Ajax Palamedes and Thersites playing with dice, which
were the invention of Palamedes. And the other Ajax is looking at them
playing: he looks like a shipwrecked man, and his body is wet with the
foam of the sea. Polygnotus seems to have purposely collected together
the enemies of Odysseus. And Ajax the son of Oileus hated Odysseus,
because he urged the Greeks to stone him for his rape of Cassandra. And
I have read in the Cyprian Poems that Palamedes going a fishing was
drowned by Diomede and Odysseus. And a little above Ajax the son of
Oileus is Meleager painted, looking at Ajax. All these except Palamedes
have beards. As to the death of Meleager, Homer informs us that a Fury
heard Althæa cursing him, and that this was the cause of his death. But
the poems called the Great Eœæ and the Minyad agree in stating that
Apollo assisted the Curetes against the Ætolians, and killed Meleager.
As to the famous tradition about the firebrand; how it was given to
Althæa by the Fates, and how Meleager was fated not to die till it was
consumed by fire, and how Althæa set it on fire in a rage, all this was
first described by Phrynichus, the son of Polyphradmon, in his play
called Pleuroniæ:

“He escaped not dread fate, but was consumed by the swift flame,
as soon as the ill-contrived firebrand was set on fire by his stern
mother.”

Phrynichus does not however seem to introduce the legend as his own
invention, but only to allude to it as one well-known throughout Greece.

In the lower part of the painting next Thracian Thamyris sits Hector,
like a man oppressed with sorrow, with both his hands on his left knee.
And next him is Memnon seated on a stone, and close to Memnon Sarpedon,
who is leaning his head on both his hands, and one of Memnon’s hands
is on Sarpedon’s shoulder. All of these have beards, and some birds
are painted on Memnon’s cloak. These birds are called Memnonides, and
every year the people near the Hellespont say they come on certain
days to Memnon’s tomb, and sweep all the parts round the tomb that are
bare of trees or grass, and sprinkle them with their wings which they
wet in the river Æsepus. And near Memnon is a naked Ethiopian boy, for
Memnon was king of the Ethiopians. However he did not come to Ilium
from Ethiopia, but from Susa in Persia and the river Choaspes, after
vanquishing all the tribes in that neighbourhood. The Phrygians still
shew the road by which he marched his army, the shortest route over the
mountains.[138]

Above Sarpedon and Memnon is Paris, as yet a beardless youth. He is
clapping his hands like a rustic, apparently to attract the notice of
Penthesilea, who looks at him, but by the toss of her head seems to
despise him, and jeer at him as a boy. She is represented as a maiden
with a Scythian bow, and a leopard’s skin round her shoulders. Above
her are two women carrying water in broken pitchers, one still in her
prime, the other rather advanced in life. There is no inscription on
either of them, except a notification that they are both among the
uninitiated. Above this pair are Callisto the daughter of Lycaon, and
Nomia, and Pero the daughter of Neleus, from every suitor of whom her
father asked the kine of Iphiclus.[139] Callisto has a bear-skin for
her coverlet, and her feet are on the knees of Nomia. I have before
stated that the Arcadians consider Nomia one of their local Nymphs. The
poets say the Nymphs are long-lived but not immortal. Next to Callisto
and the other women with her is a hill, up which Sisyphus the son of
Æolus is laboriously rolling a stone. There is also a winejar in the
painting, and an old man, and a boy, and two women, a young woman
under a rock, and an old woman near the old man. Some men are bringing
water, and the old woman’s water-pot appears to be broken, and she is
pouring all the water in the pitcher into the winejar. One is inclined
to conjecture that they are people making a mock of the Eleusinian
mysteries. But the older Greeks considered the Eleusinian mysteries
as much above all other religious services, as the gods are superior
to heroes. And under the winejar is Tantalus, undergoing all those
punishments mentioned by Homer,[140] and also terrified lest a stone
overhanging his head should fall on him. It is plain that Polygnotus
followed the account of Archilochus: but I do not know whether
Archilochus invented the addition to the legend about the stone, or
merely related what he had heard from others.

Such is a full account of the various details in this fine painting of
the Thasian painter.

[138] So _Corayus_. The meaning and reading is very obscure.

[139] See Homer’s Odyssey, xi. 287 _sq._ Neleus refused the matchless
Pero’s hand to any suitor who would not bring as a wedding-present
these kine of Iphiclus.

[140] Odyssey, xi. 582-592.




CHAPTER XXXII.


Near the temple precincts is a handsome theatre. And as you ascend from
the precincts you see a statue of Dionysus, the offering of the men
of Cnidos. In the highest part of the city is a stadium made of the
stone of Mount Parnassus, till the Athenian Herodes embellished it with
Pentelican marble. I have now enumerated the most remarkable things
still to be seen at Delphi.

About 60 stades from Delphi on the road to Mount Parnassus is a brazen
statue, and from thence it is an easy ascent for an active man, or for
mules and horses to the Corycian cavern. It got its name, as I pointed
out a little back,[141] from the Nymph Corycia, and of all the caverns
I have seen is best worth a visit. The various caverns on sea-coasts
are so numerous that one could not easily enumerate them: but the most
remarkable whether in Greece or in foreign lands are the following.
The Phrygians near the river Pencala, who originally came from Arcadia
and the Azanes, show a round and lofty cavern called Steunos, which
is sacred to the Mother of the Gods, and contains her statue. The
Phrygians also, who dwell at Themisonium above Laodicea, say that when
the army of the Galati harried Ionia and the neighbouring districts,
Hercules and Apollo and Hermes came to their aid: and showed their
chief men a cavern in a dream, and bade them hide there their women
and children. And so in front of this cavern they have statuettes of
Hercules and Hermes and Apollo, whom they call _The Cavern-Gods_.
This cavern is about 30 stades from Themisonium, and has springs of
water in it, there is no direct road to it, nor does the light of the
sun penetrate into it, and the roof in most of the cavern is very
near the ground. The Magnesians also at a place called Hylæ near the
river Lethæus have a cavern sacred to Apollo, not very wonderful for
size, but containing a very ancient statue of Apollo, which supplies
strength for any action. Men made holy by the god leap down rocks and
precipices unhurt, and tear up huge trees by the roots, and carry them
with ease through mountain passes. But the Corycian cavern excels
both of these, and through most of it you can walk without needing
torches: and the roof is a good height from the ground, and water
bubbles up from springs, but still more oozes from the roof, so that
there are droppings from the roof all over the floor of the cavern.
And those that dwell on Mount Parnassus consider it sacred to Pan and
the Corycian Nymphs. It is a feat even for an active man to scale the
heights of Parnassus from it, for they are higher than the clouds, and
on them the Thyiades carry on their mad revels in honour of Dionysus
and Apollo.

Tithorea is about 80 stades from Delphi _viâ_ Mount Parnassus, but the
carriage road by a way less mountainous is many stades longer. Bacis in
his oracles and Herodotus in his account of the invasion of Greece by
the Medes differ as to the name of the town. For Bacis calls the town
Tithorea, but Herodotus calls it Neon, and gives the name Tithorea
to the summit of Parnassus, where he describes the people of the town
fleeing on the approach of the Medes. It seems probable therefore
that Tithorea was originally the name for the entire district, but as
time went on the people, flocking into the town from the villages,
called it Tithorea and no longer Neon. And the people of the place
say it got its name from the Nymph Tithorea, one of those Nymphs
who according to the legendary lore of poets were born of trees and
especially oak-trees.[142] A generation before me the deity changed the
fortunes of Tithorea for the worse. There is the outline of a theatre,
and the precincts of an ancient market-place, still remaining. But
the most remarkable things in the town are the grove and shrine and
statue of Athene, and the tomb of Antiope and Phocus. In my account
of the Thebans I have shewn how Antiope went mad through the anger
of Dionysus, and why she drew on her the anger of the god, and how
she married Phocus the son of Ornytion, of whom she was passionately
fond, and how they were buried together. I also gave the oracle of
Bacis both about this tomb and that of Zethus and Amphion at Thebes.
I have mentioned all the circumstances worth mention about the town.
A river called Cachales flows by the town, and furnishes water to its
inhabitants, who descend to its banks to draw water.

At 70 stades distance from Tithorea is a temple of Æsculapius, who
is called Archegetes, and is greatly honoured both by the Tithoreans
and other Phocians. Within the sacred precincts are dwellings for the
suppliants and slaves of the god, the temple stands in the midst, and
a statue of the god in stone, two feet high with a beard, on the right
of which is a bed. They sacrifice all kinds of animals to the god but
goats.

About 40 stades from the temple of Æsculapius are the precincts and
shrine of Isis, and of all the Greek shrines to the Egyptian goddess
this is the holiest: for neither do the people of Tithorea live
near it, nor may any approach the shrine whom Isis herself has not
previously honoured by inviting them in dreams. The gods of the lower
world have the same practice in the towns near the Mæander, they send
visions in dreams to whoever they allow to approach their shrines.
And twice every year, in Spring and Autumn, the people of Tithorea
celebrate the Festival of Isis. The third day before each Festival
those who have right of access purify the shrine in some secret manner:
and remove to a place about 2 stades from the shrine whatever remains
they find of the victims offered in sacrifice at the previous Festival,
and bury them there. On the following day the traders make tents of
reed or any other material at hand. On the next day they celebrate the
Festival, and sell slaves, and cattle of every kind, and apparel, and
silver and gold. And at noon they commence the sacrifice. The wealthier
sacrifice oxen and deer, the poorer sacrifice geese and guineafowls,
but they do not sacrifice swine or sheep or goats. Those whose duty it
is to burn the victims in the shrine, first roll them up in bandages
of linen or flax, after the process in use in Egypt. There is a solemn
procession with all the victims, and some convey them into the shrine,
while others burn the tents before it and depart with speed. And on one
occasion they say a profane fellow, who had no right to approach the
shrine, entered it with audacious curiosity at the time the sacrificial
fire was lit, and the place seemed to him full of phantoms, and he
returned to Tithorea, related what he had seen, and gave up the ghost.
I heard a similar account from a Phœnician, of what happened on one
occasion when the Egyptians were celebrating the Festival of Isis, at
the time when they say she bewails Osiris: which is the season when the
Nile begins to rise, and the Egyptians have a tradition that it is the
tears of Isis that make the river rise and irrigate the fields. He told
me that the Roman Governor of Egypt bribed a man to enter the shrine at
Coptos during the Festival, and he came back, related what he had seen,
and also died directly after. So Homer’s word seems true, that the gods
are not seen by mortals with impunity.[143]

The olives at Tithorea are not so plentiful as in Attica and Sicyonia.
They are superior however in colour and flavour to those from Spain and
Istria: all kinds of ointment are produced from them, and they send
these olives to the Roman Emperor.

[141] See chapter 6.

[142] And consequently called _Dryads_.

[143] Iliad, xx. 131. Compare Exodus, xxxiii. 20.




CHAPTER XXXIII.


Another road from Tithorea leads to Ledon, which was formerly reckoned
a town, but was in my day deserted by its inhabitants through its
weakness, and about 80 of them live near the Cephisus, and give the
name Ledon to their settlement there, and are included in the Phocian
General Council, as the people of Panopeus also are. This settlement
by the Cephisus is 40 stades from the ruins of Ledon, which got its
name they say from an Autochthon of that name. Several towns have been
irretrievably ruined by the wrong-doing of their inhabitants, as Troy
was utterly destroyed by the outrage of Paris against Menelaus, and
the Milesians by the headlong desires and passion of Hestiæus, one
time to govern the town of the Edoni, another time to be a Councillor
of Darius, another time to return to Ionia. So too the impiety of
Philomelus caused Ledon to be wiped off the face of the globe.[144]

Lilæa is a winter day’s journey from Delphi: you descend by Parnassus:
the distance is I conjecture about 180 stades. The people of Lilæa,
when their town was restored, had a second reverse at the hand of
Macedonia, for they were besieged by Philip the son of Demetrius and
capitulated upon conditions of war, and a garrison was put into their
town, till a townsman, whose name was Patron, incited the younger
citizens to rise against the garrison, and overcame the Macedonians
and compelled them to evacuate the town on conditions of war. And the
people of Lilæa for this good service put up his statue at Delphi.
There is at Lilæa a theatre and market-place and baths: there are also
temples to Apollo and Artemis, whose statues, in a standing position,
are of Attic workmanship in Pentelican marble. They say the town got
its name from Lilæa, who was one of the Naiades, and reputed to be the
daughter of the Cephisus, which rises here, and flows at first not with
a gentle current, but at mid-day especially roars like the roaring of a
bull.[145] In spring summer and autumn the air of Lilæa is salubrious,
but in winter the proximity of Parnassus keeps it cold.

About 20 stades further is Charadra, which lies on a lofty ridge.
Its inhabitants are very badly off for water, as their only water is
from the Charadrus three stades down the hill side, which falls into
the Cephisus, and which no doubt gave its name to the place. In the
market-place are some altars to the Heroes: some say Castor and Pollux
are meant, others say some local heroes. The land near the Cephisus is
out and out the best in Phocis for planting, and sowing, and pasture:
and this part of the country is mostly portioned out into farms, so
that some think Homer’s lines,

    “And those who near divine Cephisus dwelt,”[146]

refer to those who farmed near the Cephisus, and not to the town
of Parapotamii. But this idea is not borne out by Herodotus in his
History, or by the records of the victors in the Pythian Games, which
were first instituted by the Amphictyones, and Æchmeas of Parapotamii
won the prize among boys for boxing. And Herodotus mentions Parapotamii
among the towns in Phocis that king Xerxes set on fire. Parapotamii
was however not restored by the Athenians and Bœotians, but its
inhabitants, owing to its poverty and want of money, were partitioned
out among other towns. There are now no ruins of Parapotamii, nor is
its exact site known.

From Lilæa is 60 stades’ journey to Amphiclea. The name of this place
has been changed by the natives, for Herodotus following the oldest
tradition called it Amphicæa, but the Amphictyones called it Amphiclea
in their decree for the destruction of the towns in Phocis. The natives
relate the following tradition about one of its names. They say that
one of their rulers, suspecting a plot of some of his enemies against
his baby boy, put him in a cot, and hid him in what he thought the
most secure place, and a wolf tried to get at the little fellow, but a
snake twined itself round the cot as a sure protection. And the child’s
father coming up, and fearing that the snake had harmed his little boy,
hurled his javelin at it and slew both child and snake: but learning
from some herdsmen that the snake he had killed had been the preserver
and guard of his child, he had a funeral pyre for snake and child
together. And they say the place to this day presents the appearance
of a funeral pyre blazing, and they think the town was called Ophitea
(_Snake-town_) from this snake. Noteworthy are the orgies which they
perform here to Dionysus, but there is no public entrance to the
shrine, nor is there any statue of the god. But the people of Amphiclea
say that the god prophecies to them and cures sicknesses by dreams, and
his priest is a prophet, and when possessed by the god utters oracles.

About 15 stades from Amphiclea is Tithronium, which lies in the plain,
and about which there is nothing remarkable. And 20 stades further is
Drymæa. At the place where the roads from Tithronium and Amphiclea to
Drymæa meet, near the river Cephisus, the people of Tithronium have a
grove and altars and temple to Apollo, but no statue of the god. Drymæa
is about 80 stades from Amphiclea as you turn to the left ... according
to Herodotus.[147] It was originally called Nauboles, and its founder
was they say Phocus the son of Æacus. At Drymæa is an ancient temple to
Law-giving Demeter, and the statue of the goddess, to whom they keep an
annual feast called the Thesmophoria, is erect in stone.

[144] The circumstances are narrated in ch. 2.

[145] ὦ ταυρόμορφον ὄμμα Κηφισοῦ πατρός. Eurip. _Ion._ 1261.

[146] Iliad, ii. 522.

[147] Hiatus hic est valde deflendus.




CHAPTER XXXIV.


Next to Delphi Elatea is the greatest town in Phocis. It lies opposite
Amphiclea, and is 180 stades from that place by a road mostly through
the plain, but rather uphill near Elatea. The Cephisus flows through
the plain, and bustards are very frequent on its banks. The Elateans
repulsed Cassander and the army of the Macedonians. They also contrived
to hold out against Taxilus the general of Mithridates, for which
good service the Romans gave them freedom and immunity from taxation.
They lay claim to foreign ancestry, and say that they were originally
Arcadians: for Elatus (they say) the son of Areas defended the god,
when the men of Phlegyas attacked the temple at Delphi, and afterwards
remained in Phocis with his army, and founded Elatea: which was one of
the towns in Phocis that the Mede set on fire. It shared in the general
disasters of the Phocians, and the deity also brought upon it special
troubles of its own at the hands of the Macedonians. And when Cassander
blockaded Elatea, it was Olympiodorus who mainly rendered the blockade
inoperative. But Philip, the son of Demetrius, inspired the greatest
terror in the minds of the populace at Elatea, and at the same time won
over by bribes the most influential townsfolk. And Titus Flaminius the
Roman General, who had been sent from Rome to free all Greece, promised
to grant them their ancient polity, and invited them to revolt from the
Macedonians: but whether from want of judgment, or because the populace
had their way, they continued faithful to Philip, and were reduced by
the blockade of the Romans. And some time after they held out against
Taxilus, the general of Mithridates, and the barbarians from Pontus,
and it was for that good service that the Romans granted them their
freedom. When too the Costoboci, a piratical tribe, overran all Greece
in my day, and came to Elatea, Mnesibulus got together an army of
picked men, and, though he himself fell in the battle, slew many of the
barbarians. This Mnesibulus won several victories in the course, and
in the 235th Olympiad was victor both in the stadium and in the double
course though he carried his shield. And there is a brazen statue of
him near the race-course. They have also a handsome market-place at
Elatea, and a figure of Elatus on a pillar, I do not know whether in
honour of him as their founder, or to mark his tomb. There is a temple
also of Æsculapius, and a statue of the god with a beard by Timocles
and Timarchides, who were both of Athenian extraction. At the extreme
right of Elatea is a theatre, and ancient statue of Athene in bronze:
the goddess they say fought for them against the barbarians under
Taxilus.

About 20 stades from Elatea is a temple of Athene Cranæa, the road
to it is uphill but by so gentle a slope that it is very easy and
scarcely appreciable. But the crest of the hill at the end of this
road is mostly precipitous on a limited area: and here is the temple,
with porticoes and chambers, where various people that minister to the
goddess reside, and especially the priest, whom they select out of the
youths, and take great care that he ceases to be priest when he has
passed the flower of his age. And he is priest for 5 continuous years,
during which he resides with the goddess, and takes his baths after
the ancient manner in bathing tubs.[148] The statue of the goddess was
executed by the sons of Polycles. She is armed for battle, and her
shield is an imitation of that of Athene in the Parthenon at Athens.

[148] See for instance Homer’s Odyssey, xvii. 87-90.




CHAPTER XXXV.


For Abæ and Hyampolis you take the mountainous road on the right of
Elatea: the high road from Orchomenus to Opus also leads to those
places: but to go to Abæ you turn a little off that high road to the
left. The people of Abæ say they came to Phocis from Argos, and that
their town took its name from its founder Abas, the son of Lynceus by
Hypermnestra the daughter of Danaus. The people of Abæ consider that
their town was in ancient times sacred to Apollo, and there was an
oracle of Apollo there. But the Romans and Persians did not equally
honour the god, for the Romans in their piety to Apollo granted
autonomy to the people of Abæ, but Xerxes’ army burnt the temple there.
And though the Greeks resisted the barbarians, they did not think good
to rebuild the temples that were burnt down, but to leave them for
all time as records of national hatred:[149] and so the temples at
Haliartia, and the temple of Hera at Athens on the way to Phalerum,
and the temple of Demeter at Phalerum remain to this day half-burnt.
Such also I imagine was the condition of the temple at Abæ, till in
the Phocian War, when some Phocian fugitives who were beaten in battle
fleeing for refuge to it, the Thebans, emulating the conduct of the
Medes, set them and the temple on fire. It is therefore in the most
ruinous condition of all the buildings injured by fire, for after
first suffering from the Persian fire, it was next consumed altogether
by the Bœotian. Near this great temple is a smaller one, erected to
Apollo by the Emperor Adrian, but the statues are ancient and were the
votive offering of the people of Abæ, Apollo and Leto and Artemis in
bronze. There is also a theatre at Abæ and a market-place, both ancient.

When you return to the high road for Opus the first place you come to
is Hyampolis. Its name indicates who its inhabitants were originally,
and from whence they were expelled when they came here. They were
Hyantes who had fled from Thebes, from Cadmus and his army. And at
first the town was called the town of the Hyantes, but as time went on
the name Hyampolis prevailed. Although the town was burnt by Xerxes and
rased to the ground by Philip, yet there are remains of the ancient
market-place, and a small council-chamber, and a theatre not far from
the gates. The Emperor Adrian also built a Portico which bears his
name. The inhabitants have but one well to drink and wash with, the
only other water they have is rain water in winter. The goddess they
especially worship is Artemis, and they have a temple to her, but the
statue of the goddess I cannot describe, as they only open the temple
twice a year. And the cattle they call sacred to Artemis are free from
disease and fatter than other cattle.

From Chæronea to Phocis you can go either by the direct road to Delphi
through Panopeus and by Daulis and the cross-roads, or by the rugged
mountainous road from Chæronea to Stiris, which is 120 stades. The
people of Stiris say they were originally Athenians, and came from
Attica with Peteus the son of Orneus, who was expelled from Athens by
Ægeus: and as most of the followers of Peteus came from the township
Stiria they called the town Stiris. It is on high and rocky ground, so
in summer they are very short of water, for their wells are few, nor is
the water they afford good. They serve however for baths, and for drink
for beasts of burden. But the inhabitants of Stiris have to descend
about 4 stades to get drinkable water from a spring, hewn out of the
rock: and they go down to it to draw up the water. There is at Stiris a
temple of Demeter Stiritis built of unbaked brick: the statue of the
goddess is of Pentelican marble, she has torches in her hands. Near it
is another ancient statue in honour of Demeter adorned with fillets.

[149] Compare Cicero _de Republ._ iii. 9. “Fana ne reficienda
quidem Graii putaverunt, ut esset posteris ante os documentum Persarum
sceleris sempiternum.”




CHAPTER XXXVI.


From Stiris to Ambrosus is about 60 stades: the road lies in the plain
with mountains on both sides. Vines grow throughout the plain, and
brambles, not quite so plentifully, which the Ionians and Greeks call
_coccus_, but the Galati above Phrygia call in their native tongue
_Hys_. The coccus is about the size of the white thorn, and its leaves
are darker and softer than the mastich-tree, though in other respects
similar. And its berry is like the berry of the nightshade, and about
the size of the bitter vetch. And a small grub breeds in it which, when
the fruit is ripe, becomes a gnat and flies off. But they gather the
berries, while it is still in the grub state, and its blood is useful
in dyeing wool.

Ambrosus lies under Mount Parnassus, and opposite Delphi, and got its
name they say from the hero Ambrosus. In the war against Philip and the
Macedonians the Thebans drew a double wall round Ambrosus, made of the
black and very strong stone of the district. The circumference of each
wall is little less than a fathom, and the height is 2½ fathoms,
where the wall has not fallen: and the interval between the two walls
is a fathom. But, as they were intended only for immediate defence,
these walls were not decorated with towers or battlements or any other
embellishment. There is also a small market-place at Ambrosus, most of
the stone statues in it are broken.

As you turn to Anticyra the road is at first rather steep, but after
about two stades it becomes level, and there is on the right a temple
of Dictynnæan Artemis, who is held in the highest honour by the people
of Ambrosus; her statue is of Æginetan workmanship in black stone. From
this temple to Anticyra is all the way downhill. They say the town
was called Cyparissus in ancient times, and Homer in his Catalogue of
the Phocians[150] preferred to give it its old name, for it was then
beginning to be called Anticyra, from Anticyreus who was a contemporary
of Hercules. The town lies below the ruins of Medeon, one of the towns
as I have before mentioned which impiously plundered the temple at
Delphi. The people of Anticyra were expelled first by Philip the son
of Amyntas, and secondly by the Roman Otilius, because they had been
faithful to Philip, the son of Demetrius, the king of the Macedonians,
for Otilius had been sent from Rome to protect the Athenians against
Philip. And the hills above Anticyra are very rocky, and the chief
thing that grows on them is hellebore. The black hellebore is a
purgative, while the white acts as an emetic, the root also of the
hellebore is a purgative. There are brazen statues in the market-place
at Anticyra, and near the harbour is a small temple of Poseidon,
made of unhewn stone, and plastered inside. The statue of the god is
in bronze: he is in a standing posture, and one of his feet is on a
dolphin: one hand is on his thigh, in the other is a trident. There are
also two gymnasiums, one contains baths, the other opposite to it is
an ancient one, in which is a bronze statue of Xenodamus, a native of
Anticyra, who, as the inscription states, was victor at Olympia among
men in the pancratium. And if the inscription is correct, Xenodamus
will have won the wild-olive crown in the 211th Olympiad, the only
Olympiad of all passed over by the people of Elis in their records. And
above the market-place is a conduit: the water is protected from the
sun by a roof supported on pillars. And not much above this conduit is
a tomb built of common stone: they say it is the tomb of the sons of
Iphitus, of whom one returned safe from Ilium and died in his native
place, the other Schedius died in the Troad, but his remains were
brought home and deposited here.

[150] Iliad, ii. 519.




CHAPTER XXXVII.


On the right of the town at the distance of about 2 stades is a lofty
rock, which forms part of a mountain, and on it is a temple of Artemis,
and a statue of the goddess by Praxiteles, with a torch in her right
hand and her quiver over her shoulders, she is taller than the tallest
woman, and on her left hand is a dog.

Bordering on Phocis is the town of Bulis, which got its name from
Bulon the founder of the colony, it was colonized from the towns in
ancient Doris. The people of Bulis are said to have shared in the
impiety of Philomelus and the Phocians. From Thisbe in Bœotia to Bulis
is 80 stades, I do not know whether there is any road from Anticyra to
Bulis on the mainland, so precipitous and difficult to scale are the
mountains between. It is about 100 stades from Anticyra to the port:
and from the port to Bulis is I conjecture by land about 7 stades. And
a mountain torrent, called by the natives Hercules’, falls into the sea
here. Bulis lies on high ground, and you sail by it as you cross from
Anticyra to Lechæum near Corinth. And more than half the inhabitants
live by catching shell-fish for purple dye. There are no particular
buildings to excite admiration at Bulis except two temples, one of
Artemis, the other of Dionysus; their statues are of wood, but who
made them I could not ascertain. The god that they worship most they
call Supreme, a title I imagine of Zeus. They have also a well called
Saunion.

To Cirrha, the seaport of Delphi, it is about 60 stades from Delphi,
and as you descend to the plain is a Hippodrome, where they celebrate
the Pythian horse-races. As to Taraxippus in Olympia I have described
it in my account of Elis. In this Hippodrome of Apollo there are
accidents occasionally, inasmuch as the deity in all human affairs
awards both good and bad, but there is nothing specially contrived
to frighten horses, either from the malignity of some hero, or any
other cause. And the plain of Cirrha is almost entirely bare of trees,
for they do not care to plant trees, either in consequence of some
curse, or because they do not think the soil favourable to the growth
of trees. It is said that Cirrha got its present name from the Nymph
Cirrha, but Homer in the Iliad calls it by its ancient name Crisa,[151]
as also in the Hymn to Apollo. And subsequently the people of Cirrha
committed various acts of impiety against Apollo, and ravaged the
territory sacred to the god. The Amphictyones resolved therefore to
war against the people of Cirrha, and chose for their leader Clisthenes
the king of Sicyon, and invited Solon the Athenian to assist them by
his counsel. They also consulted the oracle, and this was the response
of the Pythian Priestess, “You will not capture the tower and demolish
the town, till the wave of blue-eyed Amphitrite, dashing over the dark
sea, shall break into my grove.”

Solon persuaded them therefore to consecrate to the god the land about
Cirrha, that the grove of Apollo might extend as far as the sea. He
invented also another ingenious contrivance against the people of
Cirrha: he turned the course of the river Plistus which flowed through
the town. And when the besieged still held out by drinking rain water
and the water from the wells, he threw some roots of hellebore into
the Plistus, and when he thought the water of the river sufficiently
impregnated with this, he turned it back into its ordinary channel,
and the people of Cirrha, drinking freely of the water, were attacked
with an incessant diarrhœa, and unable to man the walls, so the
Amphictyones captured the town, and took vengeance on the inhabitants
for their conduct to the god, and Cirrha became the seaport of Delphi.
It contains a handsome temple of Apollo and Artemis and Leto, and large
statues of those divinities, of Attic workmanship. There is also a
smaller statue of Adrastea.

[151] Iliad, ii. 520.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.


Next comes the land of the Ozolian Locrians: why they were called
Ozolian is differently stated, I shall relate all that I heard. When
Orestheus the son of Deucalion was king of the country, a bitch gave
birth to a piece of wood instead of a puppy: and Orestheus having
buried this piece of wood in the ground, they say the next spring
a vine sprang from it, and these Ozolians got their name from its
branches.[152] Another tradition is that Nessus, the ferryman at
the river Evenus, did not immediately die when wounded by Hercules,
but fled to this land, and dying here rotted, as he was unburied,
and tainted the air. A third tradition attributes the name to the
unpleasant smell of a certain river, and a fourth to the smell of
the asphodel which abounds in that part. Another tradition is that
the first dwellers here were Aborigines, and not knowing how to make
garments wore untanned hides as a protection against the cold, putting
the hairy portion of the hides outside for ornament. Thus their smell
would be as unpleasant as that of a tan-yard.

About 120 stades from Delphi is Amphissa, the largest and most famous
town of these Locrians. The inhabitants joined themselves to the
Ætolians from shame at the title Ozolian. It is also probable that,
when Augustus removed many of the Ætolians to fill his town Nicopolis,
many of them migrated to Amphissa. However the original inhabitants
were Locrians, and the town got its name they say from Amphissa, (the
daughter of Macar the son of Æolus), who was beloved by Apollo. The
town has several handsome sights, especially the tombs of Amphissa
and Andræmon: with Andræmon his wife Gorge, the daughter of Œneus,
was buried. In the citadel is a temple of Athene, and statue of the
goddess in a standing position, which they say was brought by Thoas
from Ilium, and was part of the Trojan spoil. This however I cannot
credit. I showed in a previous part of my work that the Samians Rhœcus,
(the son of Philæus), and Theodorus, (the son of Telecles), were the
first brass-founders. However I have not discovered any works in brass
by Theodorus. But in the temple of Ephesian Artemis, when you go into a
room containing some paintings, you will see a stone cornice above the
altar of Artemis Protothronia; on this cornice are several statues and
among others one at the end by Rhœcus, which the Ephesians call Night.
The statue therefore of Athene at Amphissa is more ancient and ruder in
art. The people of Amphissa celebrate the rites of the youths called
Anactes (_Kings_): different accounts are given as to who they were,
some say Castor and Pollux, others say the Curetes, those who think
themselves best informed say the Cabiri.

These Locrians have other towns, as Myonia above Amphissa, and 30
stades from it, facing the mainland. Its inhabitants presented a shield
to Zeus at Olympia. The town lies on high ground, and there is a grove
and altar to the Mild Deities, and there are nightly sacrifices to
them, and they consume the flesh of the victims before daybreak. There
is also above the town a grove of Poseidon called Poseidonium, and in
it a temple, but there is no statue there now.

Myonia is above Amphissa: and near the sea is Œanthea, and at no great
distance Naupactus. All these towns except Amphissa are under the
Achæans of Patræ, as a grant from the Emperor Augustus. At Œanthea
there is a temple of Aphrodite, and a little above the town a grove of
cypress and pine, and in it a temple and statue of Artemis: and some
paintings on the walls rather obscured by time, so that one cannot
now see them clearly. I think the town must have got its name from
some woman or Nymph. As to Naupactus I know the tradition is that the
Dorians and the sons of Aristomachus built a fleet there, with which
they crossed over to the Peloponnese, hence the origin of the name.
As to the history of Naupactus, how the Athenians took it from the
Locrians and gave it to the Messenians who removed to Ithome at the
time of the earthquake at Lacedæmon, and how after the reverse of the
Athenians at Ægos-potamoi the Lacedæmonians ejected the Messenians,
all this has been related by me in my account of Messenia: and when
the Messenians were obliged to evacuate it then the Locrians returned
to Naupactus. As to the Poems called by the Greeks Naupactian, most
attribute them to a Milesian: but Charon the son of Pytheus says they
were composed by Carcinus a native of Naupactus. I follow the account
of the native of Lampsacus: for how is it reasonable to suppose that
poems written on women by a Milesian should be called Naupactian? There
is at Naupactus a temple of Poseidon near the sea, and a brazen statue
of the god in a standing posture; there is also a temple and statue
of Artemis in white stone. The goddess is called Ætolian Artemis, and
is in the attitude of a person hurling a javelin. Aphrodite also has
honours paid to her in a cavern: they pray to her for various favours,
widows especially for a second husband. There are also ruins of a
temple of Æsculapius, which was originally built by one Phalysius,
a private individual, who had an ailment in his eyes and was nearly
blind, and the god of Epidaurus sent to him the poetess Anyte with a
sealed letter. She dreamed one night and directly she woke found the
sealed letter in her hands, and sailed to Naupactus and bade Phalysius
remove the seal and read what was written. And though he was clearly
unable to read from his blindness, yet, having faith in the god, he
broke open the seal, and became cured by looking at the letter, and
gave Anyte 2,000 gold staters, which was the sum mentioned in the
letter.

[152] The Greek word for branch is _Ozos_. Hence the Paronomasia. All
the four other unsavoury traditions are connected with the Greek verb
_ozo_, I smell.




INDEX.




INDEX.

(_The number in Roman Notation is the number of the Book, the number in
Arabic Notation the number of the Chapter._)


  Achelous, a river in Ætolia, iv. 34; viii. 24.
    Its contest with Hercules, iii. 18; vi. 19.
    Father of Callirhoe, viii. 24,
      of the Sirens, ix. 34,
      of Castalia, x. 8.

  Acheron, a river in Thesprotia, i. 17; v. 14; x. 28.

  Achilles, i. 22; iii. 18, 19, 24.

  Acichorius, a general of the Galati, x. 19, 22, 23.

  Acrisius, son of Abas, ii. 16.
    Husband of Eurydice, iii. 13.
    Constructs a brazen chamber for his daughter Danae, ii. 23; x. 5.
    Killed unintentionally by his grandson Perseus, ii. 16.

  Actæa, the ancient name of Attica, i. 2.

  Actæon, son of Aristæus, ix. 2; x. 17, 30.

  Addison, ii. 20, Note.

  Adonis, ii. 20; ix. 29.

  Adrian, the Roman Emperor, i. 3, 18, 44; ii. 3, 17; vi. 16, 19; viii.
        8, 10, 11, 22.
    His love for, and deification of, Antinous, viii. 9.

  Adriatic sea, viii. 54.

  Adultery, iv. 20; ix. 36.

  Ægialus, afterwards Achaia, v. 1; vii. 1, where see Note.

  Ægina, the daughter of Asopus, ii. 5, 29; v. 22; x. 13.

  Ægina, the island, ii. 29, 30.

  Ægisthus, i. 22; ii. 16, 18.

  Ægos-potamoi, iii. 8, 11, 17, 18; iv. 17; ix. 32; x. 9.

  Æneas, the son of Anchises, ii. 21, 23; iii. 22; v. 22; viii. 12; x.
        17, 26.

  Æschylus, the son of Euphorion, i. 2, 14, 21, 28; ii. 13, 20, 24;
        viii. 6, 37; ix. 22; x. 4.

  Æsculapius, the son of Apollo, ii. 10, 26, 27, 29; iii. 23; vii. 23;
        viii. 25.
    His temples, i. 21; ii. 10, 13, 23; iii. 22, 26; iv. 30, 31; vii.
        21, 23, 27; viii. 25.

  Æsymnetes, vii. 19, 20.

  Æthra, wife of Phalanthus, her love for her husband, x. 10.

  Ætna, its craters, how prophetic, iii. 23.
    Eruption of Ætna, x. 28.

  Agamemnon, i. 43; ii. 6, 18; iii. 9; vii. 24; ix. 40.
    His tomb, ii. 16; iii. 19.

  Ageladas, an Argive statuary, iv. 33; vi. 8, 10, 14; vii. 24; viii.
        42; x. 10.

  Aglaus of Psophis, happy all his life, viii. 24.

  Ajax, the son of Oileus, his violation of Cassandra, i. 15; x. 26, 31.

  Ajax, the son of Telamon, i. 5, 35; v. 19.

  Alcæus, vii. 20; x. 8.

  Alcamenes, a statuary, a contemporary of Phidias, i. 8, 19, 20, 24;
        ii. 30; v. 10; viii. 9; ix. 11.

  Alcmæon, son of Amphiaraus, the murderer of his mother Eriphyle, i.
        34; v. 17; viii. 24.

  Alcman, the poet, i. 41; iii. 18, 26.

  Alcmena, the daughter of Amphiaraus and Eriphyle, and wife of
        Amphitryon, deceived by Zeus, v. 18.
    Hated by Hera, ix. 11.
    Mother of Hercules, v. 14.

  Alcyone, the daughter of Atlas, ii. 30; iii. 18; ix. 22.

  Alexander, son of Alexander the Great by Roxana, i. 6; ix. 7.

  Alexander the Great, i. 9; v. 21; vii. 5; ix. 23, 25.
    Said by the Macedonians to be the son of Ammon, iv. 14.
    Very passionate, vi. 18.
    Tradition about his death, viii. 18.
    Buried at Memphis, i. 6.
    His corpse removed thence by Ptolemy, i. 7.
    Statues of him, i. 9; v. 25; vi. 11.
    Cassander’s hatred of him, ix. 7.

  Alexandria, v. 21; viii. 33.

  Alpheus, a river in Pisa, iii. 8; v. 7; vi. 22.
    Enamoured of Artemis, vi. 22;
      of Arethusa, v. 7.
    Women may not cross the Alpheus on certain days, v. 6.
    Leucippus lets his hair grow to the Alpheus, viii. 20.

  Altars, v. 13, 14; vi. 20, 24; ix. 3, 11.

  Althæa, daughter of Thestius and mother of Meleager, viii. 45; x. 31.

  Altis (a corruption of ἄλσος, grove), v. 10, 11, 14, 15, 27.

  Amaltheæ cornu, iv. 30; vi. 19, 25; vii. 26. (Cornu copiæ.)

  Amazons, i. 15, 41; iii. 25; iv. 31; vi. 2.

  Amber, native and otherwise, v. 12.

  Ambraciotes, v. 23; x. 18.

  Ammon, iii. 18, 21; iv. 14, 23; v. 15; vi. 8; viii. 11, 32; ix. 16;
        x. 13.

  Amphiaraus, i. 34; ii. 13, 23; ix. 8, 19.

  Amphictyones, vii. 24; x. 2, 8, 15, 19.

  Amphion and Zethus, sons of Antiope, ii. 6; ix. 5, 17; x. 32.

  Amphion, ii. 21; vi. 20; ix. 5, 8, 16, 17.

  Anacharsis, i. 22.

  Anacreon of Teos, a friend of Polycrates, i. 2.
    The first erotic poet after Sappho, i. 25.

  Anaximenes, his ruse with Alexander the Great, &c., vi 18.

  Ancæus, the son of Lycurgus, viii. 4, 45.

  Androgeos, i. 1, 27.

  Andromache, the wife of Hector, x. 25.

  Androtion, vi. 7; x. 8.

  Angelion and Tectæus, statuaries and pupils of Dipœnus and Scyllis,
        ii. 32; ix. 35.

  Antæus, ix. 11.

  Antalcidas, Peace of, ix. 1, 13.

  Antenor, x. 26, 27.

  Anteros, i. 30; vi. 23.

  Anticlea, the mother of Odysseus, x. 29.

  Anticyra, famous for hellebore, originally called Cyparissus, x. 36.

  Antigone, ix. 25.

  Antimachus, the poet, viii. 25; ix. 35.

  Antinous, viii. 9.
    See also Adrian.

  Antioch, the capital of Syria, viii. 29.

  Antiochus, the pilot of Alcibiades, iii. 17; ix. 32.

  Antiope, the Amazon, i. 2, 41.

  Antiope, the mother of Zethus and Amphion, i. 38; ii. 6; ix. 17, 25;
        x. 32.

  Antiphanes, an Argive statuary, v. 17; x. 9.

  Antipœnus, heroism of his daughters Androclea and Alcis, ix. 17.

  Antonine, the Emperor, called by the Romans Pius, viii. 43.
    His son and successor Antonine, viii. 43.

  Anytus, one of the Titans, viii. 37.

  Aphidna, i. 17, 41; ii. 22; iii. 17, 18.

  Aphrodite, Anadyomene, ii. 1; v. 11.
    Mother of Priapus, according to the people of Lampsacus, ix. 31.
    The tutelary saint of the men of Cnidus, i. 1.
    Ancient temple of her and Adonis in common in Cyprus, ix. 41.
    Her clients, ii. 34; ix. 38.
    Her statue by Dædalus, ix. 40.
    The myrtle in connection with her, vi. 24.
    The Celestial and Pandemian Aphrodite, vi. 25; ix. 16.
    (The Latin _Venus_.)

  Apis, the Egyptian god, i. 18; vii. 22.

  Apollo, helps Alcathous, i. 42.
    Herds the cattle of Laomedon, vii. 20.
    Inventor of the lute, iii. 24; v. 14; viii. 31.
    Jealous of Leucippus, viii. 20.
    Jealous of Linus, ix. 29.
    His altar in common with Hermes, v. 14.
    See also Delphi.

  Aratus of Soli, i. 2.

  Aratus of Sicyon, ii. 8, 9; viii. 10, 52.

  Ardalus, the son of Hephaæstus, inventor of the flute, ii. 31.

  Ares, the Latin _Mars_, charged with murder, i. 21, 28.

  Areopagus, i. 28; iv. 5.

  Arethusa, v. 7; vii. 24; viii. 53.

  Argiope, a Nymph, mother of Thamyris by Philammon, iv. 33.

  Argo, the famous ship, vii. 26; ix. 32.

  Argonauts, vii. 4.

  Argos, ii. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24; vii. 17.

  Ariadne, i. 20, 22; x. 29.

  Aricia, the people of, their tradition about Hippolytus, ii. 27.

  Arimaspians, i. 24, 31.

  Arion, the horse, viii. 25.

  Arion and the dolphin, iii. 25.

  Aristocrates, viii. 5, 13.
    Heredity in vice and punishment.

  Aristodemus, king of the Messenians, iv. 8, 10, 13, 26.

  Aristogiton, i. 8, 29.

  Aristomache, the daughter of Priam, x. 26.

  Aristomenes, the hero of Messenia, iv. 6, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22,
        23, 24, 27, 32; vi. 7; viii. 14, 51.

  Aristo, the father of the famous Plato, iv. 32.

  Aristophanes on Lepreus, v. 5.

  Aristotle, the mighty Stagirite, his statue, vi. 4.

  Arsinoe, daughter of Ptolemy, and wife of her own brother, i. 7, 8;
        ix. 31.

  Arsinoites, name of a district in Egypt, v. 21.

  Art, the noble art of self-defence, vi. 10; viii. 40.

  Artemis, (the Latin _Diana_,) iii. 22; iv. 30; viii. 3, 27.
    Especially worshipped at Hyampolis, x. 35.
    Temple of the goddess at Aulis, ix. 19.
    Events there, _do._

  Artemisia, her valour at Salamis, iii. 11.

  Artemisium, a mountain, ii. 25; viii. 5.

  Ascra, in Bœotia, the birthplace of Hesiod, ix. 29, 38.

  Asopus, a river in Bœotia, ii. 6.
    Reedy, v. 14.

  Asopus, a river in Sicyonia, ii. 5, 15.

  Asphodel, its unpleasant smell, x. 38.

  Atalanta, iii. 24; viii. 35, 45.

  Athamas, son of Æolus, vii. 3.
    Brother of Sisyphus, ix. 34.
    Desirous to kill his children Phrixus and Helle, ix. 34.

  Athene, (the Latin _Minerva_,) why grey-eyed, i. 14.
    Her birth, i. 24.
    Disputes as to territory between her and Poseidon, i. 24; ii. 30.
    Gives Erichthonius to the daughters of Cecrops, i. 18.
    A colossal statue of the goddess at Thebes, ix. 11.

  Athens, sacred to Athene, i. 26.
    Captured by Sulla, i. 20.

  Athenians, very pious, i. 17, 24; x. 28. (Cf. Acts xvii. 22.)
    Helped in war by the gods, viii. 10.
    Their forces at Marathon and against the Galati, iv. 25; x. 20.
    Their expedition to Sicily, viii. 11; x. 11, 15.
    The only democracy that ever rose to greatness, iv. 35.
    Their magistrates, iii. 11; iv. 5, 15.
    Their townships, i. 3, 32, 33.
    Their law-courts, i. 28.
    Their Eponymi, i. 5.
    Their expeditions beyond Greece, i. 29.
    Their heroes, x. 10.

  Athletes, their diet in training, vi. 7.

  Atlas, v. 11, 18; vi. 19; ix. 20.

  Atlas, a mountain in Libya, i. 33; viii. 43.

  Atreus, ii. 16, 18; ix. 40.

  Attalus, an ally of the Romans, vii. 8, 16.
    His greatest feat, i. 8.
    The oracle about him, x. 15.

  Attica, whence it got its name, i. 2.
    Sacred to Athene, i. 26.

  Augeas, v. 1, 3, 4, 8.

  Augustus, iii. 11, 21, 26; iv. 31; vii. 17, 18, 22; viii. 46.
    Statues of Augustus, ii. 17; v. 12.

  Aulis, iii. 9; viii. 28; ix. 19.

  Aurora, i. 3; iii. 18; v. 22.

  Axe tried in Court, i. 24, 28.


  Babylon, its walls, iv. 31.

  Bacchantes, ii. 2, 7.

  Bacchus, see Dionysus.

  Bacis, his oracles, iv. 27; ix. 17; x. 14, 32.
    A Bœotian, x. 12.

  Bacon, Francis, Viscount St. Albans, on revenge, iii. 15, Note.

  Bady, place and river, v. 3.

  Balsam tree, ix. 28.

  Banqueting-hall at Elis, v. 15.

  Barley cakes, mysterious property of, iii. 23.

  Baths, how taken in ancient times, x. 34.
    Women’s swimming-bath, iv. 35.
    Warm baths, ii. 34; iv. 35; vii. 3.

  Bato, the charioteer of Amphiaraus, ii. 23.

  Bayle on _Hippomanes_, v. 27, Note.

  Beans, i. 37; viii. 15.

  Bear, the Great, viii. 3.

  Bears, i. 32; iii. 20; vii. 18.

  Bees of Hymettus, i. 32.
    Bees and Pindar, ix. 23.
    In connection with Trophonius, ix. 40.
    Temple fabled to have been built by them, x. 5.

  Bel, i. 16; viii. 33.

  Bellerophon, ii. 2, 4, 31; iii. 18, 27; ix. 31.

  Bias of Priene, x. 24.

  Biblis, love-passages of, vii. 5.

  Bison, x. 13.

  Bito, see Cleobis.

  Blackbirds of Mt. Cyllene, viii. 17.

  Boar’s Memorial, iv. 15, 19.

  Bœotarchs, ix. 13, 14; x. 20.

  Bones, ii. 10; iii. 22.

  Booneta, iii. 12, 15.

  Bootes, viii. 3.

  Brasiæ, iii. 24, see Note.

  Brass, first brass-founders, viii. 14; x. 38.

  Brennus, x. 8, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

  Briareus, ii. 1, 4.

  Brigantes in Britain, viii. 43.

  Briseis, v. 24; x. 25.

  Britomartis, iii. 14; viii. 2.

  Bupalus, iv. 30; ix. 35.

  Buphagus, viii. 14, 27.

  Burial, ii. 7; ix. 32.

  Bustards, x. 34.

  Byzantium, walls of, iv. 31.


  Cabiri, i. 4; iv. 1; ix. 22, 25; x. 38.

  Cadmean victory, ix. 9.

  Cadmus, the son of Agenor, iii. 15; ix. 5, 12, 19.

  C. Julius Cæsar, ii. 1; iii. 11.
    His gardens, viii. 46.

  Calais and Zetes, iii. 18.

  Calamis, a famous statuary, master of Praxias, i 3, 23; ii. 10; v.
        25, 26; vi. 12; ix. 16, 20, 22; x. 16.

  Calchas, i. 43; vii. 3; ix. 19.

  Callicrates, vii. 10, 12.

  Callimachus, i. 26; ix. 2.

  Callion, barbarity of the Galati at, x. 22.

  Calliphon of Samos, v. 19; x. 26.

  Callirhoe and Coresus, tragic love story about, vii. 21.

  Callisto, the daughter of Lycaon, changed into a she-bear, i. 25;
        viii. 3.

  Callon, a statuary of Ægina, ii. 32; iii. 18; vii. 18.

  Calus, murder of by Dædalus, i. 21, 26.

  Calydonian boar, i. 27; iii. 18; viii. 45, 46, 47.

  Canachus, a statuary, ii. 10; vi. 9, 13; vii. 18; ix. 10; x. 9.

  Cantharus, a statuary, vi. 3, 17.

  Capaneus, the son of Hipponous, struck with lightning, ix. 8, see
        Note.

  Capua, the chief town in Campania, v. 12.

  Carcinus, a native of Naupactus, x. 38.

  Carpo, a Season, ix. 35.

  Carthage, rebuilt by Julius Cæsar, ii. 1.

  Carthaginians, i. 12; v. 25; vi. 19; x. 8, 17, 18.

  Cassandra, the daughter of Priam, violated by Ajax, i. 15; v. 19; x.
        26.
    Called _Alexandra_, iii. 19, 26.

  Castalia, x. 8.

  Castor and Pollux, see Dioscuri.

  Catana, filial piety at, x. 28.

  Caverns, notable ones, x. 32.

  Ceadas, iv. 18.

  Cecrops, son of Erechtheus, king of Athens, i. 5; vii. 1; viii. 2.

  Celeus, father of Triptolemus, i. 14, 38, 39; ii. 14.

  Centaur, v. 19.
    Fight between the Centaurs and the Lapithæ, i. 17; v. 10.

  Cephalus and Aurora, i. 3; iii. 18.

  Cepheus, father of Andromeda, iv. 35.

  Cephisus, a river in Argolis, ii. 15, 20.

  Cephisus, a river in Attica, i. 37.

  Cephisus, a river in Eleusis, i. 38.

  Cephisus, a river in Bœotia, ix. 24, 38; x. 8, 33, 34.

  Ceramicus, i. 3; viii. 9.

  Cerberus, ii. 31, 35; iii. 25.

  Ceres, see Demeter.

  Cestus, viii. 40.

  Chæronea, fatal battle of, i. 18, 25; v. 20; ix. 6, 29, 40. (Milton’s
        “dishonest victory, fatal to liberty.”)

  Chaldæans, the first who taught the immortality of the soul, iv. 32.

  Champagny on Pausanias, see Title-page.

  Chaos first, ix. 27.

  Charon, x. 28. (Cf. Virgil’s “Jam senior, sed cruda deo
        viridisque senectus.”--_Æn._ vi. 304.)

  Chimæra, iii. 25.

  Chios, vii. 4.

  Chiron, a Centaur and tutor of Achilles, iii. 18; v. 5, 19.

  Chrysanthis, i. 14.

  Cicero, see Note to x. 35.

  Cimon, the son of Miltiades, ii. 29; viii. 52.

  Cinadus, the pilot of Menelaus, iii. 22.

  Cinæthon, the Lacedæmonian genealogist, ii. 3, 18; iv. 2; viii. 53.

  _Ciphos_, our _coif_, iii. 26.

  Cirrha, x. 1, 8, 37.

  Cists, used in the worship of Demeter and Proserpine, viii. 25, 37;
        x. 28.

  Cithæron, a mountain in Bœotia, i. 38; ix. 2.

  Clearchus, iii. 17; vi. 4.

  Cleobis and Bito, ii. 20, see Note.

  Cleombrotus, the son of Pausanias, king of Sparta, i. 13; iii. 5, 6;
        ix. 13.

  Cleomedes, vi. 9.

  Cleomenes, ii. 9.

  Cleon, statuary, v. 17, 21; vi. 1, 8, 9, 10.

  Clymene, reputed by some mother of Homer, x. 24.

  Clytæmnestra, ii. 16, 18, 22.

  Coats of mail, i. 21; vi. 19; x. 26.

  Coccus, x. 36.

  Cocytus, i. 17. (Cf. Virgil, _Æneid_, vi. 132, “Cocytusque
        sinu labens circumvenit atro,” and Horace, _Odes_, ii. 14-17,
        18.)

  Colophon, vii. 3, 5; ix. 32.

  Colossuses, i. 18, 42. (If gentle reader objects to this plural
        let me cite Sir T. Herbert, “In that isle he also defaced an
        hundred other colossuses.”--_Travels_, p. 267.)

  Comætho, her love-passages with Melanippus, vii. 19.

  Commentaries of events, i. 12.

  Conon, son of Timotheus, i. 1, 2, 3, 24, 29; iii. 9; vi. 3, 7; viii.
        52.

  Cordax, a dance, vi. 22.

  Coresus, see Callirhoe.

  Corinna, ix. 20, 22.

  Corinth, taken by Mummius, ii. 1; vii. 16.
    Rebuilt by Julius Cæsar, ii. 1, 3; v. 1.

  Corœbus, the Argive, i. 43.

  Corpses, remarkable, v. 20, 27; viii. 29.

  Corsica, x. 17.

  Corybantes, iii. 24; viii. 37.

  Cos, island, iii. 23; vi. 14, 17; viii. 43.

  Cosmosandalum, ii. 35.

  Costoboci, x. 34.

  Creon, i. 3; ix. 5, 10.

  Cresphontes, son of Aristomachus, ii. 18; iv. 3, 5, 31; v. 3.
    Marries the daughter of Cypselus, iv. 3; viii. 5, 29.

  Crete, island of, iii. 2; vii. 2; viii. 38, 53.
    Cretan bowmen, i. 23; iv. 8; vii. 16.

  Crocodiles, i. 33; ii. 28; iv. 34.

  Crœsus, iii. 10; iv. 5; viii. 24.

  Cronos, (the Latin _Saturnus_,) i. 18; viii. 8, 36; ix. 2, 41; x. 24.

  Crotonians, their tradition about Helen, iii. 19.
    Milo a native of Croton, vi. 14.
    Wolves numerous in the neighbourhood of Croton, vi. 14.

  Crowns in the games, viii. 48.

  Cuckoo and Hera, ii. 17.

  Curetes, iv. 31, 33; v. 7; viii. 2, 37; x. 38.

  Cybele, see the Dindymene Mother.

  Cyclades, islands, i. 1; v. 21, 23.

  Cyclopes, their buildings, ii. 16, 20, 25; vii. 25.

  Cycnus, a Celtic king, tradition about, i. 30.

  Cydias, his prowess against the Galati, x. 21.

  Cydnus, a river that flows through the district of Tarsus, a cold
        river, viii. 28.

  Cynoscephalæ, battle of, vii. 8.

  Cyprus, claims to be birth-place of Homer, x. 24.

  Cypselus, his chest, v. 17, 18, 19.


  Dædalus, the famous Athenian, son of Palamaon, why called Dædalus,
        ix. 3.
    A contemporary of Œdipus, x. 17.
    Fled to Crete, why, i. 21; vii. 4; viii. 53.
    His pupils, ii. 15; iii. 17; v. 25.
    His works of art, i. 27; ii. 4; viii. 16, 35, 46; ix. 11, 39.

  Dædalus of Sicyon, statuary also, vi. 2, 3, 6; x. 9.

  Damophon, the best Messenian statuary, iv. 31; vii. 23; viii. 31, 37.

  Danae, daughter of Acrisius and mother of Perseus, her brazen
        chamber, ii. 23; x. 5. (Horace’s “turris aenea.”)

  Danaus, how he became king of Argos, ii. 19.
    His daughters’ savageness, ii. 16, 24; x. 10.
    How he got them second husbands, iii. 12.

  Daphne, and the crown of laurel in the Pythian games, x. 7.

  Darius, the son of Hystaspes, iii. 4, 9, 12; vii. 10.

  Decelea, iii. 8.

  Delium, i. 29; ix. 6, 20; x. 28.

  Delphi, x. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

  Delta, ii. 21; vi. 26.

  Demaratus, a seven-month child, iii. 4, 7.

  Demeter, (the Latin _Ceres_,) i. 14, 37, 39, 43; ii. 35; viii. 15,
        25, 42.
    See also Triptolemus.

  Demetrius, the son of Antigonus, i. 6, 10, 25, 36; ix. 7.

  Demo, the Sibyl of Cumæ, x. 12.

  Democracies, none in Greece in old times, ix. 1.
    No democracy that we know of but Athens ever rose to greatness,
        iv. 35.
    Remark on, i. 8.

  Demosthenes, the son of Alcisthenes, i. 13, 29.

  Demosthenes, the son of Demosthenes, i. 8; ii. 33.

  Despœna, viii. 37.
    See also Proserpine.

  Deucalion, his flood, i. 18, 40; v. 8; x. 6.

  Dicæarchia, iv. 35; viii. 7. (_Puteoli._)

  Dice, vi. 24; vii. 25; x. 30.

  Dindymene Mother, vii. 17, 20; viii. 46; ix. 25. (That is Cybele.)

  Diocles, ii. 14.

  Diomede, king of Thrace, iii. 18; v. 10.

  Diomede, who led the Argives to Troy, i. 11, 28; ii. 30, 32; x. 31.
    Runs off with the Palladium, i. 22.

  Dionysius, the tyrant, i. 2; vi. 2.

  Dionysus, (the Latin _Bacchus_,) father of Priapus, ix. 31.
    Son of Zeus by Semele, iii. 24.
    Fetches up Semele from Hades, ii. 31, 37.
    Punishes Antiope, ix. 17.
    Takes Ariadne from Theseus, x. 29.
    Many legends about him, x. 29.
    His orgies, x. 33; ii. 2, 7.

  Dioscuri (_Castor and Pollux_), iii. 13, 26; iv. 31.
    Visit the house of Phormio, iii. 16.
    Their anger against the Messenians, iv. 16, 26.
    Origin of their anger, iv. 27.
    Their particular kind of hats, iii. 24; iv. 27.
    Called Anactes, ii. 36; x. 38.

  Diotimus, the father of Milo, of Croton, vi. 14.

  Dipœnus and Scyllis, pupils of Dædalus, statuaries, ii. 15, 22, 32;
        iii. 17; v. 17; vi. 19; ix. 35.

  Dirce, the legend about her, ix. 17, 25.

  Divination, various modes of, iii. 23, 26; iv. 32; vi. 2; vii. 21,
        25; ix. 11.

  Dodona, i. 17; vii. 21, 25; viii. 11, 23, 28; ix. 25; x. 12.

  Dog, cure for bite of, viii. 19.

  Dolphin, i. 44; ii. 1; iii. 25; x. 13.

  Dontas, pupil of Dipœnus and Scyllis, vi. 19.

  Doric Architecture, v. 10, 16; vi. 24.
    Dorian measure, ix. 12.

  Doriclydas, pupil of Dipœnus and Scyllis, v. 17.

  Draco, the Athenian legislator, vi. 11; ix. 36.

  Dragon, viii. 8.
    Guards the apples of the Hesperides, vi. 19.
    One wonderfully killed, ix. 26.
    Seed of the dragon’s teeth, ix. 10.
    Dragons sacred to Æsculapius, ii. 11, 28.
    Also to Trophonius, ix. 39.
    Yoked to the chariot of Triptolemus, vii. 18.

  Dreams, x. 2, 38.
    Interpreters of, i. 34; v. 23.

  Drunkenness personified, ii. 27; vi. 24.

  Dryads, viii. 4; x. 32.

  Dumb bells, v. 26; vi. 3.

  Dyrrhachium, formerly Epidamnus, vi. 10.

  Dysaules, brother of Celeus, and father of Triptolemus, i. 14; ii.
        12, 14.


  Earth, viii. 29; x. 12.
    The Great Goddess, i. 31.

  Earthquakes, ii. 7; vii. 24.

  Eating-contest between Lepreus and Hercules, v. 5.

  Ebony, i. 42; ii. 22; viii. 17, 53.

  Ecbatana, iv. 24.

  Echetlaeus, his prowess at Marathon, i. 32.

  Echinades, islands, viii. 1, 24.

  Echoes, wonderful ones, ii. 35; v. 21.

  Edoni, i. 29; x. 33.

  Eels of Lake Copais, ix. 24.

  Eira, iv. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

  Elaphius, the month of, at Elis, v. 13; vi. 20.

  Electra, married to Pylades, ii. 16; iii. 1; ix. 40.

  Elephants, i. 12; v. 12.

  Eleusinian mysteries, viii. 15; x. 31.

  Eleutherolacones, iii. 21.

  Elk, v. 12; ix. 21.

  Elysium, viii. 53.

  Emperors, Roman, statues of, i. 40; v. 20; vi. 19.
    See also under _Adrian_, _Augustus_, _C. Julius Cæsar_, _Gaius_, &c.
    Flattery to, ii. 8, Note.

  Endœus, an Athenian statuary, and pupil of Dædalus, i. 26; vii. 5;
        viii. 46.

  Enyalius, a name for Ares, (the Latin _Mars_,) iii. 14, 15; v. 18.

  Enyo, i. 8; iv. 30.

  Epaminondas, iv. 26, 31; viii. 11, 27, 49, 52; ix. 13, 14, 15.

  Epeus, the constructor of the famous Wooden Horse, i. 23; ii. 29; x.
        26.

  Ephesus, temple of Artemis at, vii. 5. (Cf. Acts; xix. 27, 28. Farrar
        very aptly quotes Appul. _Metam._ ii. “Diana Ephesia, cujus
        nomen unicum, multiformi specie, ritu vario, nomine multijugo,
        _totus veneratur orbis_.”)

  Ephors at Sparta, iii. 11.

  Epicaste, mother of Œdipus, ix. 5, 26. Better known as _Jocasta_.

  Epidaurus, a town in Argolis, ii. 26, 27, 28, 29.

  Epigoni, ix. 9, 19, 25; x. 10, 25.

  Epimenides, the Rip Van Winkle of Antiquity, i. 14.

  Eponymi, the heroes so called at Athens, i. 5.

  Erato, the Nymph, wife of Arcas, an interpreter of the oracles of
        Pan, viii. 4, 37; x. 9.

  Erechtheus, i. 5, 26, 28, 38.

  Eridanus, a Celtic river, i. 4; v. 12, 14; viii. 25.

  Eriphyle, wife of Amphiaraus, slain by Alcmæon her son, i. 34; viii.
        24.
    The famous necklace, v. 17; viii. 24; ix. 41; x. 29.

  Erymanthian boar, viii. 24.

  Eryx, conquered in wrestling by Hercules, iii. 16; iv. 36; viii. 24.

  Essenes of Ephesian Artemis, viii. 13.

  Eteocles, the son of Œdipus, v. 19; ix. 5.

  Eubœa, v. 23; viii. 14.

  Euclides, an Athenian statuary, vii. 25, 26.

  Euclus, x. 12, 14, 24.

  Evœ, the Bacchic cry, iv. 31.
    (See Horace’s _Odes_, ii. 19-5-7.)

  Euphorion, ii. 22; x. 26.

  Euphrates, the river, iv. 34; x. 29.

  Eupolis, where buried, ii. 7.

  Euripides, i. 2, 21.

  Euripus, near Chalcis, i. 23, 38.

  Eurotas, river in Laconia, iii. 1, 21; viii. 44, 54.

  Euryclides, an Athenian orator, poisoned by Philip, ii. 9.

  Eurydice, the wife of Orpheus, ix. 30.

  Eurypontidæ, ii. 36; iii. 7, 12; iv. 4.

  Eurypylus, vii. 19.

  Eurystheus, his tomb, i. 44.
    His hostility to Hercules, iv. 34.

  Eurytion, a Centaur, v. 10; vii. 18.


  Fables of the Greeks, how to be understood, viii. 8.

  Filial piety, instances of, ii. 20; x. 28.

  Fire, its inventor, ii. 19.
    Ever-burning, v. 15; viii. 9, 37.
    Magically lighted, v. 27.

  Fish, vocal in the river Aroanius, viii. 21.

  Flax, v. 5; vi. 26; vii. 21.

  Flute-playing, iv. 27; ix. 12.

  Food, primitive, viii. 1.

  Foolish desires a source of ruin, viii. 24.

  Fortune, iv. 30.

  Friendship of Phocus and Iaseus, x. 30.

  Furies of Clytæmnestra, viii. 34.
    Furies euphemistically called _The Venerable Ones_, i. 28.
    Compare vii. 25.


  Gaius, the Roman Emperor, end of, ix. 27.

  Galati, their cavalry-arrangements, x. 19.
    Their irruption into Greece, x. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

  Ganymede, v. 24.

  Gelanor, ii. 19.

  Gerenia, called by Homer _Enope_, iii. 26.

  Germans, viii. 43.

  Geryon, i. 35; iii. 16; iv. 36; v. 19.

  Getae, the, added to the Roman Empire by Trajan, v. 12.
    Brave in battle, i. 9.

  Giants, the, viii. 29, 32, 36, 47.

  _Girding oneself_, ix. 17.

  Girdles worn round the loins in the races at Olympia, i. 44.

  Glaucus of Carystus, story about, vi. 10.

  Glaucus of Chios, x. 16.

  Glaucus, the god of the sea, vi. 10.

  Gobryas, i. 1; iii. 11; ix. 1.

  Gods, the twelve, i. 3, 40; viii. 25.
    Unknown gods, i. 1; v. 14.

  Gorgias of Leontini, vi. 17; x. 18.

  Gorgon, ii. 21.
    See also Medusa.

  Gorgus, the son of Aristomenes, iv. 19, 21, 23.

  Graces, ix. 35.

  Grasshoppers, idiosyncrasy of, vi. 6.

  Greeks, apt to admire things out of their own country, ix. 36.
    Numbers that fought against Xerxes and the Galati, x. 20.
    Munificence of in their worship of the gods, v. 12.

  Griffins, i. 24.

  Gryllus, the son of Xenophon, i. 3; viii. 9, 11; ix. 15.

  Gymnopædia, festival of, iii. 11.
    Gythium, Lacedæmonian arsenal, i. 27; iii. 21; viii. 50.


  Hair, shorn to river-gods, i. 37; viii. 41.
    See also viii. 20.

  Halirrhothius, i. 21, 28.

  Hannibal, oracle about his death, viii. 11.

  Happiness only intermittent, viii. 24.

  Harmodius, i. 8, 29.

  Harmosts, officers among the Lacedæmonians, ix. 6, 32.

  Harpies, iii. 18; v. 17; x. 30.

  Hebe, i. 19; ii. 13, 17; viii. 9.

  Hecas, the seer, iv. 16, 21.

  Hecatæus, the Milesian, iii. 25; iv. 2; viii. 4, 47.

  Hecate, i. 43; ii. 22, 30.

  Hecatomphonia, iv. 19.

  Hector, son of Priam, iii. 18; v. 25; ix. 18; x. 31.

  Hecuba, x. 12, 27.

  He-goat, oracle about, iv. 20.

  Helen, the famous, a woe to Europe and Asia, x. 12.
    Tradition about, iii. 19.
    Her maids, x. 25.
    Oath taken about, iii. 20.

  Helen, a Jewess, her tomb, viii. 16.

  Helenus, son of Priam, i. 11; ii. 23; v. 22.

  Helicon, a mountain in Bœotia, ix. 26, 27, 28, 29.

  Hellas in Thessaly, gave name to the Hellenes, iii. 20.

  Hellebore, x. 36, 37.

  Helots, iii. 11, 20; iv. 23, 24; viii. 51.

  Hephæstus, (the Latin _Vulcan_,) i. 20; ii. 31; iii. 17; viii. 53;
        ix. 41.

  Hera, (the Latin _Juno_,) i. 18; ii. 15; v. 16; vi. 24.
    Story about her quarrel and reconciliation with Zeus, ix. 3.
    Becomes a virgin again annually, ii. 38.
    The cuckoo in connection with her, ii. 17.
    The peacock sacred to her, ii. 17.

  Heraclidæ, Return of the, ii. 13, 18; iii. 1; iv. 3.

  Hercules, the Egyptian, x. 13.

  Hercules, the son of Amphitryon, his Colonnade, vi. 23.
    Hunts the Erymanthian boar, viii. 24.
    Fights against the Amazons, v. 11, 25.
    Relieves Atlas, v. 10, 11.
    Brings up Cerberus from Hades, ii. 31, 35; iii. 25; ix. 34.
    Cleans Elis, v. 1, 10; ix. 11.
    Drives off the oxen of Geryon, iii. 16, 18; iv. 36; v. 19.
    Overcomes the Nemean lion, iii. 18; v. 11; vi. 5; viii. 13.
    Has an eating contest with Lepreus, v. 5.
    First accounted a god by the people of Marathon, i. 15, 32.
    Taken to heaven by Athene, iii. 18, 19.
    Kills Nessus, iii. 18.
    Introduces into Greece the white poplar, v. 14.
    Liberates Prometheus, v. 10.
    His club, ii. 31.
    His Labours, iii. 17; v. 10, 26.

  Hercules, the Idæan, v. 7, 13; ix. 27.

  Heredity, i. 6; viii. 5, 13.

  Hermæ, i. 17, 24; iv. 33; viii. 39; x. 12.

  Hermes, (the Latin _Mercury_,) vii. 27; viii. 14.
    Steals Apollo’s oxen, vii. 20.
    Takes the goddesses to Paris for the choice of beauty, iii. 18; v.
        19.
    Invents the lyre, ii. 19; v. 14; viii. 17.

  Herodes Atticus, i. 19; ii. 1; vi. 21; vii. 20; x. 32.

  Herodotus, quoted or alluded to, i. 5, 28, 43; ii. 16, 20, 30; iii.
        2, 25; v. 26; viii. 27; ix. 23, 36; x. 20, 32, 33.

  Herophile, a Sibyl, x. 12.

  Hesiod, i. 2; ix. 30, 31, 38; x. 7.
    Quoted or alluded to, i. 24; ii. 9.

  Hesperides, v. 11; vi. 19.

  Hides, garments made of, viii. 1; x. 38.
    Used as shields in battle, iv. 11.

  Hieronymus of Cardia, historian, i. 9, 13.

  Hilaira and Phœbe, ii. 22; iii. 16; iv. 31.

  Hipparchus, son of Pisistratus, i. 8, 23, 29.

  Hippocrene, ii. 31; ix. 31.
    Hippodamia, daughter of Œnomaus, v. 11, 14, 16, 17; vi. 20, 21;
        viii. 14.

  Hippodrome at Olympia, vi. 20.

  Hippolyta, leader of the Amazons, i. 41.

  Hippolytus, son of Theseus, i. 22; ii. 27, 31, 32; iii. 22.

  Hippopotamus, iv. 34; v. 12; viii. 46.

  Homer, his age and birthplace, ix. 30; x. 24.
    His oracle, viii. 24; x. 24.
    His poverty, ii. 33.
    On Homer generally, i. 2; iv. 28, 33; vii. 5, 26; ix. 40; x. 7.
    Homer is quoted very frequently, viz., i. 13, 28, 37; ii. 3, 6, 7,
        12, 14, 16, 21, 24, 25, 26; iii. 2, 7, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25,
        26; iv. 1, 9, 30, 32, 33, 36; v. 6, 8, 11, 14, 24; vi. 5, 22,
        26, 26; vii. 1, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26; viii. 1, 3, 8, 16, 18, 24,
        25, 29, 37, 38, 41, 48, 50; ix. 5, 17, 19, 20, 22, 24, 26, 29,
        30, 31, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 41; x. 5, 6, 8, 14, 17, 22, 25,
        26, 29, 30, 32, 33, 36, 37.

  Hoopoe, i. 41; x. 4.

  Hoplodamus assists Rhea, viii. 32, 36.

  Horns of animals, v. 12.
    Horn of Amalthea, vi. 25.

  Horse, curious story in connection with, v. 27.
    The famous Wooden Horse, i. 23; x. 9.
    Winged horses, v. 17, 19.

  Hyacinth, the flower, i. 35; ii. 35.

  Hyampolis, a town in Phocis, x. 1, 3, 35.

  Hyantes, ix. 5, 35.

  Hydarnes, a general of Xerxes, iii. 4; x. 22.

  Hydra, ii. 37; v. 5; v. 17.

  Hygiea, daughter of Æsculapius, i. 23; v. 20.
    Her temple, iii. 22.

  Hyllus, son of Hercules, i. 35, 41, 44; iv. 30; viii. 5, 45, 53.

  Hymettus, famous for its bees, i. 32.

  Hyperboreans, i. 31; v. 7; x. 5.

  Hypermnestra, ii. 19, 20, 21, 25; x. 10, 35.

  Hyrieus, his treasury, story about, ix. 37.

  Hyrnetho, daughter of Temenus, ii. 19, 23.
    Her tragic end, ii. 28.


  Iamidæ, seers at Elis, descendants of Iamus, iii. 11, 12; iv. 16; vi.
        2; viii. 10.

  Ibycus, the poet, ii. 6.

  Icarus, the son of Dædalus, ix. 11.

  Ichnusa, the old name of Sardinia, x. 17.

  Idæan Dactyli, v. 7.

  Iliad, The Little, iii. 26; x. 26.

  Ilissus, a river in Attica, i. 19.

  Ilithyia, i. 18; viii. 32; ix. 27.

  Immortals, The, vi. 6; x. 19.

  Inachus, a river, ii. 15, 18, 25; viii. 6.

  Indian sages taught the immortality of the soul, iv. 32.
    India famous for wild beasts, iv. 34; viii. 29.

  Ino, i. 42, 44; iii. 23, 24, 26; iv. 34; ix. 5.

  Inscriptions, ox-fashion, v. 17.

  Inventions, source of, viii. 31.

  Inundations, destruction caused by, vii. 24; viii. 14.

  Io, daughter of Inachus, i. 25; iii. 18.

  Iodama, ix. 34.

  Iolaus, nephew of Hercules, vii. 2; viii. 14.
    Shares in his uncle’s Labours, i. 19; viii. 45.
    Kills Eurystheus, i. 44.
    Colonizes Sardinia, vii. 2; x. 17.
    His hero-chapel, ix. 23.

  Ion, the son of Xuthus, i. 31; vii. 1.

  Iphiclus, the father of Protesilaus, iv. 36; v. 17; x. 31.

  Iphigenia, daughter of Agamemnon, i. 33, 43; iii. 16; ix. 19.

  Iphimedea, mother of Otus and Ephialtes, ix. 22; x. 28.

  Iphitus, king of Elis, v. 4, 8; viii. 26.

  Iphitus, the son of Eurytus, iii. 15; x. 13.

  Iris, the flower, ix. 41.

  Iron, first fused, iii. 12; x. 16.

  Ischepolis, son of Alcathous, killed by the Calydonian boar, i. 42,
        43.

  Isis, the Egyptian goddess, i. 41; ii. 4, 13, 32, 34; v. 25; x. 32.

  Ismenius, a river in Bœotia, ix. 9, 10.

  Isocrates, i. 18.

  Issedones, i. 24, 31; v. 7.

  Isthmian games, i. 44; ii. 1, 2.
    People of Elis excluded from them, v. 2; vi. 16.

  Ister, river, viii. 28, 38.

  Ithome, iv. 9, 13, 14, 24, 31.

  Ivory, i. 12; v. 11, 12; vii. 27.

  _Ivy-cuttings_, feast so called, ii. 13.


  Jason, husband of Medea, ii. 3; v. 17.

  Jay, anecdote about the, viii. 12.

  Jerusalem, viii. 16.

  Jocasta, ix. 5.
    (Called Epicaste, ix. 26.)

  Joppa, iv. 35.

  Jordan, the famous river, v. 7.


  Keys, the three keys of Greece, vii. 7.

  Kites, idiosyncrasy of at Olympia, v. 14.


  Labyrinth of the Minotaur in Crete, i. 27.
    (Cf. Virg. Æneid, v. 588-591. Ovid, Metamorphoses, viii. 159-168.)

  Lacedæmonians go out on campaign only when the moon is at its full,
        i. 28.
    Go out to battle not to the sound of the trumpet, but to flutes
        lyres and harps, iii. 17.
    Care not for poetry, iii. 8.
    Tactics in battle, iv. 8.
    Always conceal their losses in battle, ix. 13.
    Their forces at Thermopylæ, x. 20.
    Their kings, how tried, iii. 5.

  Lacedæmonian dialect, iii. 15.
    Brevity, iv. 7.

  Laconia originally called Lelegia, iv. 1.

  Ladder-pass, viii. 6.

  Læstrygones, viii. 29; x. 22.

  Lais, ii. 2.

  Laius, son of Labdacus, King of Thebes, ix. 5, 26; x. 5.

  Lamp of Athene, ever burning, i. 26.

  Lampsacus, people of, anecdote about, vi. 18.
    Great worshippers of Priapus, ix. 31.

  Laomedon, father of Priam, vii. 20; viii. 36.

  Lapithæ, their fight with the Centaurs, i. 17; v. 10.

  La Rochefoucauld anticipated by Pindar. Note, x. 22.

  Laurium, its silver mines, i. 1.

  Law-courts at Athens, various names of, i. 28.

  Leæna, mistress of Aristogiton, i. 23.

  Lebadea in Bœotia, sacred to Trophonius, i. 34; ix. 39.

  Lechæum, ii. 1, 2; ix. 14, 15; x. 37.

  Leda, i. 33; iii. 13, 16.

  Leonidas, the hero of Thermopylæ, i. 13; iii. 3, 4, 14; viii. 52.

  Leontini, the birth-place of the famous Gorgias, vi. 17.

  Leprosy, cure for, v, 5. (Credat Judæus Apella!)

  Lesbos, iii. 2; iv. 35; x. 19, 24.

  Lescheos, author of the _Capture of Ilium_, x. 25, 26, 27.

  Leto, (the Latin _Latona_,) i. 18, 31; iii. 20; viii. 53.

  Leucippus, his love for Daphne, viii. 20.

  Leuctra, i. 13; iv. 26; viii. 27; ix. 6, 13, 14.

  Libya, famous for wild beasts, ii. 21.

  Libyssa, where Hannibal died, viii. 11.

  Linus, ix. 29.

  Lipara, x. 11, 16.

  Lophis, story about, ix. 33.
    (Cf. story of Jephthah.)

  Lounges, iii. 14, 15; x. 25.
    Lots, iv. 3; v. 25.

  Love, its power, vii. 19.
    Success in love, vii. 26.
    Cure of melancholy caused by, vii. 5.
    Little sympathy with lovers from older people, vii. 19.
    Tragedies through love, i. 30; vii 21; viii. 20.

  Lycomidæ, i. 22; iv. 1; ix. 27, 30.

  Lycortas, iv. 29; vii. 9; viii. 50.

  Lycurgus, the famous legislator, iii. 2, 14, 16, 18; v. 4.

  Lygdamis, the father of Artemisia, iii. 11.

  Lygdamis, the Syracusan, as big as Hercules, v. 8.

  Lynceus, son of Aphareus, his keen eyesight, iv. 2.
    Slain by Pollux, iv. 3.

  Lynceus, the husband of Hypermnestra, ii. 19, 21, 25.
    Succeeds Danaus, ii. 16.

  Lyre, invented by Hermes, v. 14; viii. 17.
    First used by Amphion, ix. 5.

  Lysander, iii. 5, 6, 8, 11, 17, 18; ix. 32; x. 9.

  Lysippus, a Sicyonian statuary, i. 43; ii. 9, 20; vi. 1, 2, 4, 5, 14,
        17; ix. 27, 30.

  Lysis, the early schoolmaster of Epaminondas, ix. 13.


  Macaria, i. 32.

  Machærion, viii. 11.

  Machaon, son of Æsculapius, ii. 11, 23, 26, 38; iii. 26; iv. 3.

  Machinery, or mechanism,
    at Olympia, vi. 20.
    At Jerusalem, viii. 16.

  Mæander, river in Asia Minor, famous for its windings, v. 14; vii. 2;
        viii. 7, 24, 31; x. 32.

  Magic, v. 27.

  Maneros, the Egyptian Linus, ix. 29.

  Mantinea, ii. 8; viii. 3, 8, 12.

  Manto, daughter of Tiresias, vii. 3; ix. 10, 33.

  Marathon, i. 15, 32; iv. 25; x. 20.

  Mardonius, son of Gobryas, i. 1, 27; iii. 4; vii. 25; ix. 1, 2, 23.
    Panic of his men, i. 40; ix. 25.

  Marpessa, the Widow, viii. 47, 48.

  Marsyas, i. 24; ii. 7; viii. 9; x. 30.

  Martiora, ix. 21.

  Mausoleums, viii. 16.

  Mausolus, viii. 16.

  Medea, ii. 3, 12; viii. 11.

  Medusa, the Gorgon, i. 21; ii. 20, 21; v. 10, 12, 18; viii. 47; ix.
        34.

  Megalopolis, ii. 9, 27; iv. 29; vi. 12; viii. 27, 30, 33; ix. 14.
    Its theatre, ii. 27.

  Megara, i. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44; vii. 15.

  Megaris, i. 39, 44.

  Meleager, ii. 7; iv. 2; x. 31.

  Melicerta, i. 44; ii. 1; ix. 34.

  Memnon, his statue, i. 42.

  Memnonides, birds so called, x. 31.

  Memphis, i. 18.

  Menander, i. 2, 21.

  Menelaus, the son of Atreus and husband of Helen, iii. 1, 14, 19; v.
        18; x. 25, 26.

  Menestratus, ix. 26.

  Miletus, vii. 2, 24; viii. 24, 49; x. 33.

  Milo, of Croton, his wonderful strength, vi. 14.

  Miltiades, son of Cimon, i. 32; ii. 29; vi. 19; vii. 15; viii. 52.

  Minos, i. 17, 27; ii. 30, 34; iii. 2; vii. 2, 4; viii. 53.

  Minotaur, i. 27; iii. 18.

  Minyad, the poem so called, iv. 33; ix. 5; x. 28, 31.

  Mirrors, remarkable ones, vii. 21; viii. 37.

  Mithridates, king of Pontus, i. 20; iii. 23; ix. 7.

  Money, its substitute in old times, iii. 12.

  Moon enamoured of Endymion, v. 1.
    Full moon and the Lacedæmonians, i. 28.

  Mullets, love mud, iv. 34.

  Mummius, ii. 1, 2; vii. 15, 16.
    His gifts at Olympia, v. 10, 24.

  Musæus, i. 14, 22, 25; iv. 1; x. 5, 7, 9, 12.

  Muses, the, ix. 29.

  Mycenæ, ii. 15, 16; v. 23; vii. 25; viii. 27, 33; ix. 34.

  Myrtilus, the son of Hermes, ii. 18; v. 1, 10; vi. 20; viii. 14.
    Myrtle, sacred to Aphrodite, vi. 24.

  Myrtoan sea, why so called, viii. 14.

  Myus, its mosquitoes, vii. 2.


  Nabis, tyrant at Sparta, iv. 29; vii. 8; viii. 50.

  Naked, its meaning among the ancients. See Note, x. 27.

  Names, confusion in same names general, viii. 15.
    Different method of giving names among Greeks and Romans, vii. 7.

  Narcissus, ix. 31, 41.

  Naupactian poems, ii. 3; iv. 2; x. 38.

  Naupactus, iv. 24, 26; vi. 16; ix. 25, 31; x. 38.

  Nausicaa, daughter of Alcinous, i. 22; v. 19.

  Neda, river, iv. 20, 36; v. 6; viii. 38, 41.

  Neleus, iv. 2, 36; v. 8; x. 29, 31.
    His posterity, ii. 18; iv. 3.

  Nemean games, ii. 15, 24; vi. 16; viii. 48; x. 25.

  Nemesis, i. 33; vii. 5, 20; ix. 35.

  Neoptolemus, son of Achilles, the Retribution of, iv. 17.
    (As to Neoptolemus generally, see _Pyrrhus_.)

  Nereids, ii. 1; iii. 26; v. 19.

  Nereus, iii. 21.

  Nero, the Roman Emperor, ii. 17, 37; v. 12, 25, 26; vii. 17; ix. 27;
        x. 7.

  Nessus, iii. 18; x. 38.

  Nestor, iii. 26; iv. 3, 31, 36.

  Nicias, the Athenian General, i. 29.

  Nicias, animal painter, i. 29; iii. 19; iv. 31; vii. 22.

  Nicopolis, founded by Augustus, v. 23; vii. 18; x. 8, 38.

  Nicostratus, v. 21.

  Night, v. 18; vii. 5.

  Night-attack, ingenious, x. 1.

  Nightingales at Orpheus’ tomb, ix. 30.

  Nile, famous river of Egypt, i. 33; ii. 5; iv. 34; v. 7, 14; viii.
        24; x. 32.

  Nineveh, viii. 33.

  Niobe, i. 21; ii. 21; v. 11, 16; viii. 2.

  Nisus, i. 19, 39; ii. 34.

  North wind, viii. 27. (_Boreas._)

  Nymphs, iii. 10; iv. 27; ix. 24; x. 31.

  Nymphon, ii. 11.


  Oceanus, i. 33.

  Ocnus, x. 29.
    See Note.

  Octavia, her temple at Corinth, ii 3.

  Odeum at Athens, i. 8, 14; vii. 20.

  Odysseus, (the Latin _Ulysses_,) i. 22, 35; iii. 12, 20; iv. 12; v.
        25; vi. 6; viii. 3, 14, 44; x. 8, 26, 28, 29, 31.

  Œdipodia, ix. 5.

  Œdipus, i. 28, 30; ix. 2, 5, 26; x. 5.

  Œnobius, i. 23.

  Œnomaus, v. 1, 10, 14, 17, 20, 22; vi. 18, 20, 21; viii. 14, 20.

  Œnotria, viii. 3.

  Œta, Mount, iii. 4; vii. 15; x. 22.

  Olen, i. 18; ii. 13; v. 7; viii. 21; ix. 27; x. 5.

  Oligarchies, established by Mummius, vii. 16, Note.

  Olympias, daughter of Neoptolemus, mother of Alexander the Great, i.
        11, 25; iv. 14; viii 7; ix. 7.

  Olympus, Mount, in Thessaly, vi. 5.

  Olynthus, iii. 5.

  Onatas, ÆEginetan statuary, v. 25, 27; vi. 12; viii. 42; x. 13.

  Onga, ix. 12.

  Onomacritus, i 22; viii. 31, 37; ix. 35.

  Ophioneus, the seer, iv. 10, 12, 13.

  Ophitea, legend about, x. 33.

  Opportunity, the youngest son of Zeus, v. 14.

  Oracles, ambiguous, viii. 11.
    (Compare case of ‘Jerusalem’ in Shakspere, 2 Henry IV., Act iv.,
        Scene iv., 233-241.)

  Orestes, son of Agamemnon, i. 28; ii. 18, 31; iii. 1, 16, 22; vii.
        25; viii. 5, 34.

  Orithyia, i. 19; v. 19.

  Orontes, a river in Syria, vi. 2; viii. 20, 29, 33; x. 20.

  Orpheus, i. 14, 37; ii. 30; iii. 13, 14, 20; v. 26; vi. 20; ix. 17,
        27, 30.

  Osiris, x. 32.

  Osogo, viii. 10.

  Ostrich, ix. 31.

  Otilius, vii. 7; x. 36.

  Otus and Ephialtes, ix. 29.

  Ox-killer, i. 24, 28.

  Oxen given in barter, iii. 12.

  Oxyartes, father of Roxana, i. 6.

  Oxylus, curious tale about, v. 3.

  Ozolian, x. 38.


  Palæmon, i. 44; ii. 2; viii. 48.

  Palamedes, ii. 20; x. 31.

  Palladium, i. 28; ii. 23.

  Pamphus, i. 38, 39; vii. 21; viii. 35, 37; ix. 27, 29, 31, 35.

  Pan, i. 28; viii. 26, 31, 36, 38, 54.

  Panic fear, x. 23.

  Parian stone, i. 14, 33, 43; v. 11, 12; viii. 25.

  Paris, iii. 22; v. 19; x. 31.

  Parnassus, Mount, x. 4, 5, 6, 8, 32, 33.

  Parrots come from India, ii. 28.
    (Did Pausanias remember Ovid’s “Psittacus Eois imitatrix ales ab
        Indis.” Amor. ii. 6. 1.)

  Parthenon at Athens, i. 24; viii. 41.

  Patroclus, the friend of Achilles, iii. 24; iv. 28; x. 13, 26, 30.

  Patroclus, Egyptian Admiral, i. 1; iii. 6.

  Pausanias, son of Cleombrotus, i. 13; iii. 17; viii. 52.

  Pausanias, a Macedonian, murderer of Harpalus, ii. 33.

  Peacock sacred to Hera, ii. 17.

  Peace with Wealth, i. 8; ix. 16.

  Pegasus, ii. 4, 31; ix. 31.

  Pelagos, viii. 11.
    See Oracles, ambiguous.

  Peleus, father of Achilles, i. 37; ii. 29; iii. 18; v. 18; viii. 45;
        x. 30.

  Pelias, iv. 2; v. 8, 17; viii. 11; x. 30.

  Pelion, Mount, x. 19.

  Peloponnesian War, iii. 7; iv. 6; viii. 41, 52.

  Pelops, ii. 18, 22, 26; v. 1, 8, 10, 13, 17; vi. 20, 21, 24; viii.
        14; ix. 40.

  Pencala, river in Phrygia, viii. 4; x. 32.

  Penelope, wife of Odysseus, iii. 12, 13, 20; viii. 12.

  Pentelicus, a mountain in Attica, famous for its stone quarries, i.
        19, 32.

  Penthesilea, v. 11; x. 31.

  Pentheus, i. 20; ii. 2; ix. 2, 5.

  Periander, son of Cypselus, one of the Seven Wise Men, i. 23; x. 24.

  Pericles, i. 25, 28, 29; viii. 41.

  Perjury punished, ii. 2, 18; iv. 22; v. 24.

  Pero, the matchless daughter of Neleus, x. 31.

  Perseus, son of Danae, and grandson of Acrisius, i. 22; ii. 15, 16,
        20, 21, 22, 27; iii. 17; iv. 35; v. 18.

  Persians, i. 18, 32, 33; iii. 9; ix. 32.
    Their shields called _Gerrha_, viii. 50; x. 19.

  Petroma, viii. 15.

  Phæacians, iii. 18; viii. 29.

  Phædra, the wife of Theseus, enamoured of her stepson Hippolytus, i.
        22; ii. 32; ix. 16; x. 29.

  Phaennis, a prophetess, x. 15, 20.

  Phaethon, i. 3.

  Phalanthus, x. 10, 13.

  Phalerum, i. 1, 28.

  Phemonoe, first priestess of Apollo at Delphi, x. 5, 6, 12.

  Phidias, famous Athenian statuary, i. 3, 4, 24, 28, 33, 40; v. 10,
        11; vi. 4, 25, 26; vii. 27; ix. 4, 10; x. 10.
    His descendants, v. 14.

  Philammon, father of Thamyris, iv. 33; x. 7.

  Philip, oracle about the two Philips, vii. 8.

  Philip, the son of Amyntas, i. 6, 25; ii. 20; iii. 7, 24; iv. 28; v.
        4; vii. 7, 10, 11; viii. 7, 27; ix. 1, 37; x. 2, 3, 36.

  Philip, the son of Demetrius, i. 36; ii. 9; vi. 16; vii. 7, 8; viii.
        8, 50; x. 33, 34.

  Philoctetes, v. 13; viii. 8, 33; x. 27.

  Philomela, i. 5, 14, 41; x. 4.

  Philomelus, x. 2, 8, 33.

  Philopœmen, son of Craugis, iv. 29; vii. 9; viii. 27, 49, 51, 52.

  Phocian Resolution, x. 1.

  Phocian War, iv. 28; ix. 6; x. 3.

  Phœbe, see Hilaira.

  Phœnix, x. 26.

  Phormio, son of Asopichus, i. 23, 29; x. 11.

  Phormio, the fisherman of Erythræ, vii. 5.

  Phormio inhospitable to Castor and Pollux, iii. 16.

  Phoroneus, ii. 15, 19, 20, 21.

  Phrixus, son of Athainas, i. 24; ix. 34, 38.

  Phrontis, the pilot of Menelaus, x. 25.

  Phryne, beloved by Praxiteles, i. 20; ix. 27; x. 15.

  Phrynichus, play of, x. 31.

  Phytalus, i. 37.

  Pillars, viii. 45.

  Pindar, i. 8; ix. 22, 23, 25; x. 24.
    Quoted or alluded to, i. 2, 41; iii. 25; iv. 2, 30; v. 14, 22; vi.
        2; vii. 2, 26; ix. 22; x. 5, 16, 22.

  Piræus, i. 1.

  Pirithous, son of Zeus, and friend of Theseus, i. 17, 30; v. 10;
        viii. 45; x. 29.

  Pisander of Camirus, ii. 37; viii. 22.

  Pisistratus, tyrant of Athens, i. 3, 23; ix. 6.
    Collects Homer’s Poems, vii. 26.

  Pittacus of Mitylene, one of the Seven Wise Men, x. 24.

  Plane-trees, wonderful, vii. 22, with Note.

  Platanistas at Sparta, iii. 11, 14.

  Platæa, battle at, v. 23; vi. 3; ix. 2; x. 15.

  Plato, the famous, i. 30; iv. 32.
    Quoted, vii. 17.
    Cited, x. 24.

  Pluto, i. 38; ii. 36; ix. 23.

  Poets, at kings’ courts, i. 3.
    Statues of, ix. 30.

  Pollux, see Dioscuri.

  Polybius, viii. 9, 30, 37, 44, 48.

  Polycletus, Argive statuary, ii. 17, 20, 22, 24, 27; vi. 2, 4, 7, 9,
        13; viii. 31.

  Polycrates, i. 2; viii. 14.

  Polydamas, vi. 5.

  Polydectes, i. 22.

  Polygnotus, famous Thasian painter, i. 18, 22; ix. 4; x. 25, 26, 27,
        28, 29, 30, 31.

  Polynices, son of Œdipus, ii. 19, 20, 25; iv. 8; ix. 5; x. 10.

  Polyxena, i. 22; x. 25.

  Pomegranate, ii. 17; vi. 14; viii. 37; ix. 25.

  Poplar, ii. 10; v. 13, 14.

  Poseidon, (the Latin _Neptune_,) i. 24, 27, 30; ii. 1, 4, 22, 30; iv.
        42; vi. 25; viii. 10, 25, 42.

  Praxias, x. 19.

  Praxiteles, the famous, lover of Phryne, i. 2, 20, 23, 40, 43, 44;
        ii. 21; v. 17; vi. 26; ix. 1, 2, 11, 27, 39; x. 15, 37.

  Priam, ii. 24; iv. 17; x. 25, 27.

  Priapus, ix. 31.

  Processions, i. 2, 29; ii. 35; vii. 18; x. 18.

  Procne, i. 24, 41.

  Procrustes, i. 38.

  Prœtus, ii. 7, 12, 16, 25; viii. 18; x. 10.

  Prometheus, ii. 14, 19; v. 10; x. 4.

  Promontory called _Ass’ jawbone_, iii. 22, 23.

  Prophetical men and women, x. 12, with Note.

  Proserpine, i. 38; ii. 36; iv. 30; viii. 31, 42, 53; ix. 23, 31.

  Proteus, iii. 18; viii. 53.

  Proverbs, see ii. 9; iv. 17; vi. 3, 10; vii. 12; ix. 9, 30, 37; x. 1,
        14, 17, 29.

  Providence, v. 25.

  Prusias, viii. 11.

  Psamathe, i. 43; ii. 19.

  Psyttalea, island of, i. 36; iv. 36.

  Ptolemies proud of calling themselves Macedonians, x. 7, cf. vi. 3.
    Much about the various Ptolemies in, i. 6, 7, 8, 9.

  Purple, iii. 21; v. 12.

  Puteoli, iv. 35; viii. 7.

  Pylades, i. 22; ii. 16, 29; iii. 1.

  Pylæ, that is Thermopylæ, ix. 15.

  Pylos, iv. 2, 3, 31, 36.

  Pyramids, ix. 36.

  Pyrrhus (Neoptolemus), the son of Achilles, i. 4, 11, 13; ii. 23;
        iii. 20, 25, 26; iv. 17; x. 7, 23, 24, 25, 26.

  Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, i. 6, 9, 10, 11; iv. 29, 35.

  Pythionice, i. 37.

  Pytho, v. 3; x. 6.


  Quoits, ii. 16; v. 3; vi. 14.


  Return from Ilium, Poem so called, x. 28, 29, 30.

  Rhea, viii. 8, 36; ix. 2, 41.

  Rhegium, iv. 23, 26; v. 25.

  Rhianus, iv. 1, 6, 15, 17.

  Rhinoceros, v. 12; ix. 21.
    Called also Ethiopian bull.

  Rhœcus of Samos, viii. 14; ix. 41; x. 38.

  Rose, sacred to Aphrodite, vi. 24.

  Roxana, wife of Alexander the Great, i. 6; ix. 7.


  Sacadas, ii. 22; iv. 27; vi. 14; ix. 30; x. 7.

  Sacrifices, remarkable, vii. 18; viii. 29, 37.

  Sails, an invention of Dædalus, ix. 11.

  Salamis, i. 35, 36, 40.

  Samos, vii. 2, 4, 10.

  Sanctuaries, not to be approached by the profane, viii. 5; x. 32,
        (Procul o, procul este, profani!)

  Sappho, the Lesbian Poetess, i. 25, 29; viii. 18; ix. 27, 29.

  Sardinia, x. 17.

  Sardis, iii. 9; iv. 24.

  Sardonic laughter, x. 17.

  Saturnus. See Cronos.

  Satyrs, i. 23.
    Satyr of Praxiteles, i. 20.

  Scamander, v. 25.

  Scedasus and his two daughters, ix. 13.

  Scimetar of Cambyses, i. 28.

  Scipio, viii. 30.

  Sciron, killed by Theseus, i. 3, 44.

  Scopas, i. 43; ii. 10, 22; vi. 25; viii. 28, 45, 47; ix. 10, 17.

  Scorpion with wings, ix. 21.

  Scylla, daughter of Nisus, legend about, ii. 34.

  Scyllis of Scione, famous diver, x. 19.

  Scythians, travel in waggons, viii. 43.
    (Compare Horace, Odes, Book iii. Ode 24. 9-11. “Campestres
        melius Scythae, Quorum plaustra vagas rite trahunt domos,
        Vivunt.”)

  Sea, Red, i. 33.
    Dead, v. 7.

  Seasons, v. 11, 17; ix. 35.

  Seleucia, on the Orontes, i. 16; viii. 33.

  Seleucus, son of Antiochus, i. 6, 16.

  Semele, daughter of Cadmus, mother of Dionysus by Zeus, ii. 31, 37;
        iii. 24; ix. 5.

  Serapis, i. 18; ii. 4, 34; iii. 14, 22, 25; iv. 32; vii. 21; ix. 24.

  Ser, and the Seres, vi. 26.

  Seriphus, i. 22.

  Serpents, remarkable ones, viii. 4, 16.
    None in Sardinia, x. 17.

  Sheep, accompanying Spartan kings to war, ix. 13.

  Shields, Used by the Celts in fording rivers, x. 20.

  Ship at Delos, i. 29.

  Sibyl, ii. 7; vii. 8; x. 9.

  Sibyls, various, x. 12.

  Sicily, a small hill near Athens, viii. 11.

  Sight suddenly lost and recovered, iv. 10, 12; x. 38.

  Silenus, i. 4, 23; ii. 22; iii. 25.
    Sileni mortal, vi. 24.

  Simonides, i. 2; iii. 8; vi. 9; ix. 2; x. 27.

  Sinis, i. 37; ii. 1. (Pityocamptes.)

  Sirens, ix. 34; x. 6.

  Sisters, love of by brothers, i. 7; iv. 2; ix. 31.

  Sisyphus, son of Æolus, ii. 1, 3, 5; x. 31.

  Sleep the god most friendly to the Muses, ii. 31.

  Smyrna, v. 8; vii. 5.

  Snake, story about, x. 33.

  Socrates, i. 22, 30; ix. 35.

  Solon, i. 16, 18; x. 24.

  Sophocles, i. 21, 28.

  Sosigenes, viii. 31.

  Sosipolis, vi. 20, 25.

  Sparta, iii. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

  Sparti, viii. 11; ix. 5. Note. ix. 10.

  Speech, ill-advised, iii. 7, 8.

  Sperchius, river, x. 20, 21, 22, 23.

  Sphacteria, i. 13, 15; iii. 5; iv. 36; v. 26; vi. 22.

  Sphinx, the, ix. 26.

  Spiders, ix. 6.

  Stade. See Note, i. 1.

  Stesichorus, iii. 19.

  Stratagems of Homer, iv. 28.

  Strongyle, a volcanic island, x. 11.

  Stymphelides, birds so called, viii. 22.

  Styx, river, viii. 17, 18.

  Submission to an enemy, technical term for, Note on x. 20.
    See also iii. 12.

  Sulla, i. 20; ix. 7, 33; x. 20.

  Sun-shade used by ladies, vii. 22.

  Sunium, i. 1, 28.

  Suppliants not to be injured with impunity, vii. 24, 25.
    See also iii. 4; iv. 24.

  Sus, river, ix. 30.

  Susa, i. 42; iii. 9, 16; iv. 31; vi. 5.

  Swallows, idiosyncrasy of at Daulis, x. 4.

  Swan-eagles, viii. 17.


  Tænarum, promontory of, iii. 14, 25; iv. 24.

  Tantalus, ii. 22; v. 13; x. 30, 31.

  Taraxippus, vi. 20.

  Tarentum, iii. 12; x. 10, 13.

  Tarsus, viii. 28.

  Telamon, son of Æacus, i. 35, 42; ii. 29; viii. 45.

  Telesilla, ii. 20, 28, 35.

  Tellias of Elis, x. 1, 13.

  Tenedos, x. 14.
    Tenedian axe, x. 14.

  Tereus, i. 5, 41; ix. 16; x. 4.

  Teucer, son of Telamon, i. 28; viii. 15.

  Thamyris, iv. 33; ix. 5, 30; x. 7, 30.

  Thebes, ii. 6; iv. 27; vii. 15, 17; viii. 33; ix. 3, 5, 6, 7, 8.

  Themis, v. 17; viii. 25; x. 5.

  Themisto, reputed by some mother of Homer, x. 24.

  Themistocles, i. 1, 36; viii. 50, 52; x. 14.

  Theoclus, Messenian seer, iv. 16, 20, 21.

  Theodorus of Samos, iii. 12; viii. 14; ix. 41; x. 38.
    His seal carved out of an emerald for Polycrates, viii. 14.

  Thermopylæ, vii. 15; ix. 32; x. 20, 21.

  Thersites, x. 31.

  Theseus, i. 1, 2, 3, 17, 19, 22, 27, 37, 39, 41, 44; ii. 1, 22, 30,
        32; iii. 18, 24; v. 10, 11; vii. 17; viii. 45, 48; ix. 31, 40;
        x. 29.

  Thetis, mother of Achilles, v. 18, 22.

  Thucydides, the famous Historian, i. 23; vi. 19.
    Possibly alluded to, i. 8.

  Thyestes, ii. 18.

  Thyiades, x. 4, 19, 32.

  Thyrsus of Dionysus, iv. 36; viii. 31.

  Tiger, ix. 21.

  Timagoras, tragic story of, i. 30.

  Timon of Athens, the famous Misanthrope, i. 30.

  Timotheus, the Milesian harper and poet, iii. 12; viii. 50.

  Tiphys, the pilot of the Argo, ix. 32.

  Tiresias, vii. 3; ix. 18, 32, 33.

  Tiryns, ii. 16, 17, 25; v. 23; vii. 25; viii. 2, 33, 46; ix. 36.

  Tisias, vi. 17.

  Tissaphernes, iii. 9.

  Titans, the, vii. 18; viii. 37.

  Tityus, iii. 18; x. 4, 11, 29.

  Tomb of Helen, a Jewess, at Jerusalem, viii. 16.

  Tortoises, i. 44; viii. 23.
    Lyres made out of them, ii. 19; viii. 17, 54.

  Townships of Attica, i. 31, 32, 33.

  Traitors, various ones that troubled Greece, vii. 10.

  Trajan, the Emperor, iv. 35; v. 12.

  Treasuries, ix. 36, 37, 38; x. 11.

  Trench, the Great, iv. 6, 17, 20, 22.

  Tripods, v. 17; vii. 4.

  Triptolemus, i. 14, 38; ii. 14; vii. 18; viii. 4.

  Tritons, viii. 2; ix. 20, 21.

  Trœzen, ii. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.

  Trophies, unwisdom of erecting, ix. 40.

  Trophonius, iv. 16, 32; viii. 10; ix. 11, 37, 39, 40; x. 5.

  Tros, father of Ganymede, v. 24.

  Troy, why it fell, x. 33.
    (Compare Horace, Odes, iii. 3. 18-21. “Ilion, Ilion Fatalis
        incestusque judex Et mulier peregrina vertit In pulverem.”)

  Tyndareus, ii. 18; iii. 1, 15, 17, 18, 21.

  Tyrants, the Thirty, i. 29.

  Tyrtæus, iv. 6, 8, 13, 14, 15, 16.


  Ulysses. See Odysseus.

  Umpires at Olympia, v. 9.

  Unknown gods, i. 1; v. 14.
    (Compare Acts: xvii. 23.)


  Venus. See Aphrodite.

  Vermilion, viii. 39.

  Vespasian, the Roman Emperor, vii. 17.

  Vesta, i. 18; ii. 35; v. 14.

  Vinegar, its effect on Pearls, viii. 18.

  Voice, found through terror, x. 15.

  Volcanic islands, x. 11.

  Vulcan. See Hephæstus.


  Water, various kinds of, iv. 35.

  To whitewash two walls, Proverb, vi. 3. See Note.

  Wine elevating, iii. 19.
    (“Vinum lætificat cor hominis.” Ps. ciii. 15.)

  Wise Men, the Seven, i. 23; x. 24.
    Their famous sayings, especially _Know thyself_, and _Not too much
        of anything_, x. 24.

  Wolves, men turned into, vi. 8; viii. 2.
    Many in the neighbourhood of Croton, vi. 14.
    None in Sardinia, x. 17.

  Word for the day given to soldiers, ix. 27.

  Wordsworth on Daphne.
    See Note, x. 7.

  World, centre of, x. 16.

  Worshipping the deity with other people’s incense, Proverb, ix. 30.


  Xanthippus, father of Pericles, i. 25; iii. 7; viii. 52.

  Xenocrates, iv. 32; ix. 13.

  Xenophon, i. 3; v. 6; ix. 15.

  Xerxes, i. 8; iii. 4; vi. 5; viii. 42, 46; x. 7, 35.


  Young, Dr., On Commentators, Preface, p. vi.


  Zancle, iv. 23.

  Zethus, ii. 6; ix. 5, 8, 17.

  Zeus, (the Latin _Jupiter_,) the chief of the gods, viii. 36.
    Assumed the appearance of Amphitryon, v. 18.
    Traditions about his early years, iv. 33; v. 7; viii. 8, 28, 36, 38.
    His two jars, viii. 24.
    Represented with three eyes, why, ii. 24.




Transcriber’s Notes


A number of typographical errors were corrected silently.

Cover image is in the public domain.

Index was added to table of contents.

Index for Calydonian boar to vol 9 chapter 45 deleted as no such chapter
exists.

Errata was incorporated into text.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAUSANIAS' DESCRIPTION OF GREECE, VOLUME II. ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
